m^:k' 


Wil 


////   ///  //  /  /////?'"^s 


^073 


7^1       Fu  r'vc  I  $  s 


C  3CO  I  4, 


bro-ivitcj    i.^-<    -^<.j  i'K'vt.e-^s 


WS  CnmAZ  CriTLDREM'SROOM 
DOrJNELL  Ll^miCf  CENTER 
20  WEST  53  STREET 
IJEWYORK,  N.y.   10019 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2007  with  funding  from 

IVIicrosoft  Corporation 


http://www.archive.org/details/drawingforbeginnOOfurn 


DRAWING  FOR  BEGINNERS 


'I^f->s 


Fiff.  1.    A  Pack  fiio.m  a  Sketch-bdhi, 
[ChapUr  .\77l 


DRAWING 

FOR    BEGINNERS 


BY 

DOROTHY  FURNISS 


PUBLISHED  BY 
BRIDGMAN  PUBLISHERS 
BY    SPECIAL 
ARRANGEMENT 
WITH  GEORGE  G. 
HARRAP  &  CO.  LTD. 
LONDON 


BRIDGMAN    PUBLISHERS 
PELHAM  NEW   YORK 


c  'h'So 


\  (^ 


Printed  in  Great  Britain 
by  Turnbull  6^  Spears,  Edinburgh 


TO 

MY  FATHER 
HARRY   FURNISS 

And  all  ike  breeze  of  Fancy  blows. 
And  every  dew-drop  paints  a  bow. 
The  wizard  lightnings  deeply  glow. 

And  every  thought  breaks  out  a  rose. 

Tennyson 


FOREWORD 

HAVE  you  heard  the  reply  given  by  a  small  boy  to  a 
query,  "  How  do  you  draw  ?  " 
"  I  think,"  he  said,  "  and  then  I  draw  round  my 
think." 

It  is  an  excellent  answer  to  a  very  difficult  question. 

Many  an  artist  could  not  give  as  lucid  a  reply.  As  far  as 
I  can  judge,  and  I  have  been  peculiarly  fortunate  in  meeting 
many  artists,  the  great  artist  would  probably  say  : 

"  How  do  I  draw  ?  Here — give  me  a  paint-brush  " — and 
if  he  were  inclined  to  be  brutally  frank — "  don't  ask  me  fool 
questions  ;  watch — this  is  how  it  is  done."  And  he  would 
proceed  with  a  few  swift  strokes  to  paint  something,  at 
which  you  would  gasp  and  feel  no  wiser  than  before.  It 
would  look  perfect.  It  would  be  perfect.  But  how  was  it 
done  ?  He  thought,  and  then  drew  round  his  thought.  The 
great  artist  speaks  with  his  tools  ;  more  often  than  not  he  is 
a  man  of  few  words. 

We  are  told  that  when  a  Japanese  artist  wishes  to  paint 
a  flower  he  watches  its  growth  from  bud  to  blossom  and 
then  to  seed.  After  a  little  time  has  elapsed  he  takes  up  his 
brush  and  paints  his  remembrance  of  the  flower.  Whether 
he  could  describe  the  manner  in  which  he  intends  to  paint 
that  flower  is  doubtful. 

We  must  think  with  the  brush  and  the  pencil ;  we  must 
think  first  and  then  draw  round  our  '  think.' 

I  hope  that  this  book  may  help  you  to  arrange  your 
thoughts. 

It  is  but  a  helping  hand  on  the  broad  highway  that  leads 
to  the  great  world  of  art. 

D.  F. 


CONTENTS 

CHAPTER  PAGE 

Introduction  :    A  Few  Technical  Hints  13 

I.  How    TO    Begin.     Simple    Subjects    for 

Drawing  and  Painting  20 

II.  Drawing  our  Toys  28 

III.  Drawing  Ourselves  and  Others  36 

IV.  Drawing  Hands  44 
V.  Drawing  Feet  52 

VI.  Drawing  Head,  Face,  Features,  and  Hair         60 

VII.  Drawing  People  in  Right  Proportions  79 

VIII.  Drawing  Inanimate  Things  83 

IX.  Drawing  our  Pets  and  other  Animals  88 

X.  Colour,  and  how  to  Find  it  106 

XI.  Measuring  and  Perspective  114 

XII.  Sketching  Out  of  Doors  141 

XIII.  How  to  Catch  a  Likeness  160 

XIV.  Action  and  Composition  171 
XV.  Light  and  Shade  182 

XVI.  Correcting  our  Drawings  198 

XVII.  Materials  199 

Index  205 


9 


ILLUSTRATIONS  IN  HALF-TONE 
AND  COLOUR 


PAGK 

A  Page  from  a  Sketch-book 

Frontisp 

dece 

Ivy  Leaf  and  Feather 

24 

Models  illustrating  Varied  Shapes  and 

Textures 

26 

Various  Toys 

32 

Toy  Horse  and  Doll 

34 

Kathleen 
Jack 

38 
40 

Left  Hand  Pointing 

Left  Hand  in  Various  Positions 

44  <v 
46  v/' 

Hand  Gloved  and  Ungloved 

48  ^" 

Hands  and  Wrists 

50  y  ' 

Jack's  Foot 

54 

Margery's  Foot 

56 

Back  and  Side  View  of  Feet 

58 

Eyes 

64   /• 

Noses 

68  i/ 

Mouths 

72  v/' 

Ears 

74 

Hair 

76  \/' 

Baby's  Head 

78 

Mufti  the  Cat  and  Robin  the  Puma 

90 
11 

Drawing  for  Beginners 

PAGE 

Birds  at  Rest  and  in  Flight  92 

Squirrel  and  Horses  100 

Dogs  102 

(a)  An  Artificial  Silk   Poppy  :    how   it  should   and 
HOW  it  should  not  be  painted,      [h)  Two  Colour 

Schemes  and  First  Impressions  of  both  110 

The  New  Wing  of  the  Tate  Gallery  136 

Sketching  Plants.      Thumbnail  Landscape  Sketches  148 

Fence  overhanging  a  Rock  150 

Tree  growing  out  of  a  Rock                                     '  150 

A  Silhouette  of  Trees.      Sketches  of  Ruins  154 

A  Simple  Landscape  156 

On  the  Beach  158 

Expression  in  Portraits  164 

Action  and  Rhythm  in  Composition  172 

The  Madonna  della  Sedia  180 

Simple  Objects  in  Artificial  Light  184 

Simple  Objects  in  Daylight  184 

Light  and  Shade  on  Coloured  Objects  186 

Stump-drawing  of  Old  Man's  Head  190 


12 


DRAWING  FOR  BEGINNERS 

INTRODUCTION 

A  Few  Technical  Hints 

Drawing  with  the  Lead  Pencil 

A  PENCIL  has  many  excellent  qualities.  It  is  a  clean 
tool  and  easy  to  handle.  It  can  be  carried  in  the 
pocket  and  pressed  into  service  whenever  required. 
Beyond  sharpening,  it  requires  no  attention. 

To  sharpen  a  pencil  you  should  pare  the  wood  in  small 
shavings  with  a  sharp  knife.  When  a  small  portion  of  the 
lead  is  exposed  place  the  lead  on  a  piece  of  paper  and  whittle 
down  to  a  firm  and  not  very  thin  point.  A  very  sharp  point 
is  a  mistake.  With  such  a  point  we  are  inclined  to  dig  into 
the  paper,  and  thus  to  add  to  our  difficulties  when  erasing. 
A  thin  point,  moreover,  snaps  easily,  needs  constant  sharpen- 
ing, and  therefore  leads  to  much  wasting  of  valuable  lead. 

A  word  or  two  about  the  position  of  the  pencil  when 
drawing. 

We  hold  it,  of  course,  as  we  do  the  pen,  between  the  thumb 
and  the  first  two  fingers,  and  half-way  up  the  shaft. 

There  is  a  modern  fashion  of  holding  the  pen  between  the 
second  and  third  fingers,  and  whatever  may  be  said  for  this 
position  in  writing  nothing  could  be  advanced  in  its  favour 
for  drawing. 

An  overwhelming  argument  for  holding  the  pencil  between 
the  thumb  and  the  first  two  fingers  is  this :  the  hand  never 
tires. 

I  have  never  heard  an  artist  complain  of  a  tired  hand, 
though  his  work  extended  from  early  morning  till  late  at 
night ;  the  reason  lies  in  the  perfect  balance  of  the  tool  in 
his  hand. 

Take  the  pencil  between  the  first  finger  and  the  thumb 

13 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

and  hold  it  lightly.  Is  it  not  perfectly  balanced  ?  Does 
not  the  point  respond  to  the  slightest  motion  of  the  two 
fingers  ?  Raise  the  thumb.  If  you  are  holding  the  pencil 
correctly,  it  remains  resting  against  the  two  fingers  and  the 
root  of  the  first  finger.  The  little  finger  is  the  pivot  of  the 
hand.  The  hand  sweeps  round  in  curves  from  the  tip  of  the 
finger  with  perfect  freedom. 

Practise  various  touches  with  your  pencil.  For  light, 
feathery,  gossamer  lines  hold  the  pencil  lightly  and  half-way 
up  the  shaft ;  for  rich  firm  effects  hold  the  pencil  firmly  and 
lower  on  the  shaft,  rubbing  the  lead  to  and  fro  without 
removing  the  point  from  the  paper ;  for  minute  or  detailed 
drawing  it  will  probably  be  desirable  to  hold  the  pencil 
lower  still. 

A  medium  HB  pencil  is  generally  useful.  B  or  BB  for 
textures,  rough-coated  animals,  etc. 

A  firm-surfaced  paper  such  as  cartridge  is  useful  both  for 
pencil  and  water-colour.  A  polished  card  is  not  advisable, 
neither  is  a  paper  with  a  rough  '  toothed  '  surface  ;  the  latter 
is  apt  to  lend  a  tricky  effect  which  is  alluring,  but  dangerous. 
It  is  wiser  to  employ  straightforward  methods.  Then  you 
know  exactly  the  various  stages  of  your  progress. 

Do  not  use  patent  pencils  with  metal  holders  or  decorated 
tops.     The  ordinary  plain  wooden  pencil  is  the  best  tool. 

Drawing  with  Black  Chalk 

Black  chalk,  in  the  shape  of  a  pencil,  is  a  pleasant  medium, 
but  it  has  one  disadvantage,  it  is  very  difficult  to  erase. 
Therefore  the  use  of  chalk  necessitates  a  certain  amount  of 
confidence  and  experience.  In  other  words,  do  not  begin 
your  studies  with  chalk  in  preference  to  lead,  but  reserve  it 
for  your  later  work. 

Chalk  gives  a  rich  velvety  tone  and  never  a  greasy  shine, 
the  drawback  of  blacklead.  It  is  delightful  for  quick  sketches, 
for  materials  of  a  coarse  or  rough  texture,  for  the  sketching 
of  animals,  buildings,  trees,  and  landscapes. 

Chalk  crumbles  and  breaks  more  easily  than  lead,  and  it 
14 


Introduction 

white  chalk  gives  the  highest  Hghts,  and  the  paper  itself 
forms  the  middle  tone. 

I  know  of  nothing  more  interesting  than  sketching  animals, 
dogs,  rabbits,  and  goats  with  these  three  mediums. 

White  chalk  needs  very  little  pointing.  It  crumbles  and 
breaks  with  the  slightest  encouragement,  and  the  small  pieces 
are  often  useful  for  sharpening  up  the  edges,  or  touching  in 
the  brightest  light. 

Drawing  with  Coloured  Chalks 

Coloured  chalks  are  very  simple  mediums.  Often  the  baby 
begins  with  a  box  of  coloured  chalks  as  a  step  toward  the 
colour-box. 

Chalk  does  not  trickle  about  the  paper  like  water-colour, 
and  is,  moreover,  a  very  direct  medium. 

A  red  berry  demands  red  chalk  ;  a  blue  bead  demands 
blue  chalk  ;  a  skein  of  mixed  silk  or  wool  of  blue,  green,  and 
yellow  demands  blue,  green,  or  yellow  chalk. 

By  placing  yellow  against  blue,  or  blue  against  green,  or 
red  against  brown,  we  obtain  a  degree  of  shading,  a  mixing 
of  tints,  which  teaches  us  to  blend  our  colours.  Chalks 
should  not  be  applied  to  the  paper  too  heavily,  but  laid  on 
with  a  ligV^:  touch.  There  is  no  need  to  point  the  chalks. 
By  rolling  the  chalk  in  the  fingers  we  can  usually  find  a  sharp 
little  edge.  Rub  the  chalk  on  a  piece  of  waste  paper,  and  on 
one  side  only  ;  that  will  give  a  flattened  side  for  sharp  and 
decided  drawing. 

Drawing  with  the  Brush 

Drawing  with  the  brush  is  more  difficult  than  with  the 
pencil,  but  you  should  accustom  yourself  to  the  use  of  both. 

It  is  far  better  to  paint  a  picture  from  the  very  beginning 
with  a  brush.  Drawing  first  with  a  pencil  and  then  with 
a  brush  necessitates  changing  one's  tool,  and  readjusting 
one's  mind.  We  look  at  a  model,  pencil  in  hand,  very 
differently  from  the  way  we  regard  the  same  object  when 
holding  a  brush. 

B  17 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

If  you  accustom  yourself  to  the  use  of  the  brush  you  will 
soon  find  it  an  adaptable  tool. 

The  artist  holds  the  brush  in  the  same  way  as  he  holds  the 
pen  or  the  pencil,  and  he  shifts  the  position  according  to  the 
demands  of  the  subject. 

For  instance,  if  we  are  applying  a  broad  wash  of  colour  we 
should  hold  the  brush  with  freedom,  and  fairly  high  on  the 
shaft.  One  with  a  fair  point,  full  and  firm,  will  be  necessary 
for  drawing.  A  long  hairy  point  will  give  a  feeble  line,  and 
one  too  short  and  blunt  no  line  at  all. 

A  brush  that  is  at  its  thickest  the  size  of  an  ordinary 
lead  pencil  is  a  useful  tool.  A  very  small  brush  will  prove 
inefficient,  for  in  drawing  with  a  brush  a  fairly  bold  drawing  is 
aimed  at. 

If  you  have  made  a  mistake  cleanse  the  brush  with  fresh 
water,  and  while  it  is  still  full  of  this  pass  it  over  the 
mistake.  Then  complete  the  erasure  by  rubbing.  Do  not 
rub  too  hard  or  the  surface  of  the  paper  will  be  destroyed 
and  refuse  to  take  colour  other  than  a  misty  blur  or 
blot. 

Clean  blotting-paper  applied  to  a  mistake — first  lightly 
brushed  with  water — will  sometimes  erase  it. 

Sketch  in  light  tints,  not  dark. 

In  order  to  get  a  fine  point,  fill  your  brush  with  colour, 
wipe  it  on  a  cloth,  or  roll  the  tip  round  on  a  piece  of  blotting- 
paper. 

To  run  a  good  deal  of  colour  on  your  paper,  charge  your 
brush  with  paint  and  put  it  on  with  rapid  touches. 

For  the  darkest  shadows,  wait  till  your  paper  is  drying 
and  use  the  water  sparingly. 

Drawing  with  Charcoal 

Charcoal  is  by  far  the  most  fascinating,  as  it  is  the  most 
difficult  medium,  therefore  it  will  be  wise  to  keep  this  for 
our  most  advanced  studies. 

But  we  must  bear  in  mind  that  no  medium  takes  the  place 
of  charcoal.  If  we  shirk  its  use  and  adhere  obstinately  to  the 
18 


Introduction 

pencil  we  shall  lose  the  freedom  that  is  essential  for  the 
development  of  our  art. 

You  will  require  a  small  box  of  Vine  charcoal  and  Michelet 
paper  ;  if  you  intend  to  use  sheets  of  paper  instead  of  sketch- 
books— and  this  I  strongly  advise — you  must  have  also  a 
drawing-board  on  which  to  pin  the  paper,  and  an  easel.  (Only 
by  standing  do  we  get  perfect  freedom  for  the  handling  of 
our  large  drawings.) 

Charcoal  has  several  irritating  qualities.  It  snaps  easily 
and  crumbles,  and  it  rubs  away  despite  spraying  with  fixa- 
tive. Nevertheless  there  is  no  medium  more  fascinating  and 
more  satisfying.  It  is  equally  useful  for  delicate  effects  and 
for  those  of  a  bold  and  vigorous  character. 

Charcoal  can  be  used  at  arm's  length ;  it  is  usually  held — 
for  quick  sketching  of  big  subjects — at  the  end  and  not  at 
the  middle  of  the  shaft  like  the  chalk  or  lead  pencil. 

It  requires  very  little  sharpening  and  never  a  point.  A 
flattened  side  answers  the  purpose. 

Rub  the  stick  on  sanded  paper  or  shave  with  a  knife, 
shaving  not  toward  the  tip  and  bearing  away,  but  holding 
the  charcoal  in  the  left  hand  and  along  the  first  finger.  Pare 
the  charcoal  inwardly  with  the  grain  of  the  wood,  for,  as  you 
probably  know,  charcoal  is  burnt  wood. 

The  pith  of  bread  (worked  into  small  pellets)  makes  a  better 
eraser  for  charcoal  than  rubber,  though  putty  rubber  is  often 
used. 

When  fixing  a  charcoal  study  stand  not  too  near  the  easel, 
but  a  pace  or  two  away,  so  that  the  spray  falls  in  a  light,  even 
shower  over  your  drawing.  When  standing  too  near  the 
liquid  falls  in  blobs  and  blots  the  drawing. 


19 


CHAPTER  I 

How  to  Begin.    Simple  Subjects  for 
Drawing  and  Painting 

Do  you  like  painting  ?     Does  drawing  interest  you  ? 
Have  you  a  pencil,  a  box  of  chalks,  or  a  paint-box  ? 
Because,  if  you  have  even  one  of  these  things,  you 
can  open  the  door  to  such  jolly  times. 

Do  you  remember  Alice  finding  in  Wonderland  the  little 
closed  door,  and  how  she  longed  to  open  the  door  and  walk 
into  the  charming  garden  ?  Well,  there's  a  garden  just  as 
fascinating  as  the  one  seen  by  Alice,  and  the  keys  to  it  are 
your  pencil  and  brush. 

This  garden,  like  Alice's,  is  full  of  wonderful  surprises. 
You  never  know  w^hat  is  lying  in  wait,  what  quaint,  curious, 
and  beautiful  things  are  to  be  found.  Would  you  like  to  go 
into  it  ?  Then  come  with  me.  You  have  the  keys  in  your 
hands. 

But  first  I  will  ask  you  a  question.  Have  you  ever  heard 
of  the  story  of  the  shepherd-boy  of  Vespignano  ? 

Once  upon  a  time  there  lived  in  Italy  a  little  shepherd-boy 
who  was  so  passionately  fond  of  drawing  that  he  would  pick 
up  a  stick  and  draw  with  it  on  the  dusty  roads  and  sandy 
rocks. 

You  might  ask  why  he  used  such  rough  tools  ;  it  was  all 
the  material  he  could  call  his  own.  Paper  and  parchment 
were  far  beyond  the  reach  of  shepherd-boys.  But  Giotto, 
for  that  was  his  name,  drew  quite  happily  with  his  pointed 
stick  upon  the  ground,  and  he  had  all  the  hillside  from  which 
to  choose  his  subjects.  He  drew  the  flowers,  the  grass,  and 
the  pine-trees.  Best  of  all,  he  liked  to  draw  his  sheep,  and 
20 


How  to  Begin 


these  he  drew  with  loving  care.  A  great  artist  called 
Cimabue  happened  to  pass  one  day  when  Giotto  was  absorbed 
in  his  drawing.  His  curiosity  was  awakened,  and  dismount- 
ing from  his  horse  he  drew  near.  To  his  unbounded  surprise 
he  saw,  traced  on  the  ground,  a  number  of  beautiful  little 
sketches. 

He  began  to  talk  with  Giotto,  and  soon  discovered  that 
the  boy's  whole  soul  was  in  his  simple  art.  And,  being  a 
wise  and  very  generous  man,  he  determined  to  do  all  that  lay 
in  his  power  to  educate  Giotto  as  an  artist.  In  a  very  Uttle 
time  the  shepherd-boy  left  Vespignano  for  Florence,  where 
he  entered  the  great  man's  studio.  Being  extraordinarily 
gifted  and  more  than  usually  industrious,  he  made  rapid 
progress  in  his  art.  He  soon  outstripped  his  master,  and  in 
course  of  time  was  acclaimed  the  foremost  artist  of  his  day. 

And  that  is  the  story  of  Giotto,  who  died  ten  years  after 
Edward  III  came  to  the  English  throne. 

Young  people  (and  sometimes  old  people  are  not  much 
wiser)  are  fond  of  excusing  their  laziness  by  saying,  "  I  can't 
draw  this — or  I  can't  draw  that.  I  haven't  got  the  materials, 
or  the  pencil  won't  work."  Which  last  excuse  is  about  as 
reasonable  as  mounting  a  push-bicycle  and  expecting  it  to 
carry  you  up  a  hill  without  your  moving  your  legs. 

The  shepherd-boy  taught  himself  by  drawing  with  a  pointed 
stick  on  a  smooth  piece  of  ground.  So  lack  of  materials  is  no 
excuse  for  lack  of  effort. 

One  of  my  young  readers  may  cry,  "  Draw  !  Draw  !  / 
draw  ?  Why,  I  cannot  draw  a  straight  line."  As  a  matter 
of  fact,  a  perfectly  straight  line  is  one  of  the  most  difficult 
things  to  draw.  There  are  many  artists  who  cannot  easily 
draw  a  straight  line.  If  you  study  Nature — and  she  is  our 
safest  guide — you  will  never  see  an  absolutely  straight  line. 
If  you  do  see  one,  you  may  be  sure  that  the  hand  of  man  has 
helped  to  make  it. 

A  very  general  excuse  is  that  which  pleads  the  impossi- 
bility of  drawing  two  sides  of  an  object  alike.  Have  you 
ever  seen  two  '  sides  '  alike  in  Nature — a  tree,  a  flower,  or  even 

21 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

a  single  blade  of  grass,  inch  by  inch  and  tint  by  tint,  the 
same  ?     Look  round  and  judge  for  yourself. 

Only  man  makes  things  mathematically  exact.  He  is 
forced  to  balance  one  side  with  the  other  side.  The  cup,  the 
vase,  the  house,  will  not  stand  and  support  itself.  Nature  is 
bound  by  no  such  rules,  and  Nature  is  always  an  artist. 

Would  you  like  to  know  the  most  difficult  thing  of  all  to 
draw  ?     Without  question,  a  perfect  circle. 

Strangely  enough  there  was  one  artist  whose  fortune  was 
made  through  the  drawing  of  a  circle.  It  was  Giotto,  the 
shepherd-lad  whose  story  we  have  just  been  discussing. 
When  his  name  was  beginning  to  be  known  the  Pope  sent  to 
learn  more  about  him.  He  wished  to  employ  the  cleverest 
artist  to  be  found  in  all  Italy  to  paint  pictures  on  the  walls  of 
the  great  church  of  St  Peter  at  Rome. 

And  how  do  you  think  Giotto  convinced  the  envoys  of  his 
fitness  for  the  work  ?  He  took  a  large  sheet  of  paper,  and, 
dipping  his  brush  into  red  paint,  he  drew  a  circle  with  one 
sweep  of  his  arm,  perfect  and  exact. 

"  Take  that  to  the  Pope,"  he  said. 

And  the  Pope  admitted  that  of  all  the  paintings  submitted 
by  the  artists  not  one  equalled  the  perfection  of  Giotto's  O  ; 
whence  we  have  the  proverb,  "  As  round  as  Giotto's  O," 
signifying  perfection. 

We  are  not,  unfortunately,  all  Giottos.  Straight  lines, 
symmetrical  sides,  perfect  circles — perhaps  when  we  are  older 
we  shall  be  able  to  attack  these  problems  without  flinching, 
but  now,  away  with  them  and  away  with  all  excuses — let  us 
begin. 

Take  a  sheet  of  paper,  or  open  your  sketch-book  ;  pick  up 
a  pencil.     Now  what  shall  we  draw  ? 

Some  children  bubble  with  odd  fancies ;  men,  horses, 
fairies,  dogs  come  tripping  to  their  minds  ;  but  you  and  I 
are  not  so  sure.  We  will  choose  something  simple,  something 
interesting. 

What  of  a  leaf,  an  ivy  leaf  ?— for  that  we  can  easily  find 
whether  we  live  in  city  or  country. 
22 


How  to  Begin 

It  is  a  quaint  shape  when  we  come  to  observe  it  closely. 
Would  you  call  it  a  long,  square,  or  round  shape  ?  I  should 
say  that  it  resembled  a  heart. 

Then  we  will  draw  a  heart-shape.  Next  we  see  a  large  vein 
running  through  the  centre  of  the  heart.  It  extends  from  the 
very  tip  of  the  leaf  to  the  stout  little  stalk  which  eventually 
fastens  itself  on  to  the  main  branch. 

Now  we  had  better  mark  the  chief  points  of  our  leaf,  which 
are  three  in  number.  And  also  there  are  two  or  three  a  trifle 
smaller.  These  we  also  draw.  And  we  note  that  the  large 
central  vein  is  met  by  two  smaller  veins,  and  that  these, 
with  two  more,  radiate  from  the  stalk. 

Turn  the  leaf  and  look  at  its  back  and  see  how  wonderfully 
these  veins  converge  to  the  stalk. 

Put  in  some  of  the  veins  lightly  and  carefully,  choosing 
the  biggest  and  the  most  important. 

Next  we  should  note  that  the  light  comes  from  one  side, 
and  the  side  farthest  from  the  light  is  in  shadow.  We  might 
shade  the  edges  of  the  leaf  with  our  pencil  and  sharpen  and 
shade  the  strongly  curved  stalk,  and  any  other  part  that 
needs  to  be  strengthened. 

You  may  say  that  you  live  where  there  are  no  ivy  leaves. 
Then  take  a  maple  leaf,  a  sycamore,  or  a  chestnut ;  any  leaf 
at  hand.  I  am  not  laying  down  any  hard-and-fast  rules, 
but  merely  trying  to  help  you  with  something  that  you  want 
to  do. 

If  you  prefer  it,  draw  a  shell  or  a  feather.  I  suggest  these 
particular  things  because  they  are  simple  and  easy  to  draw, 
and  within  the  reach  of  most  people. 

A  feather  can  be  studied  on  the  same  lines  as  a  leaf,  presum- 
ing that  it  is  a  well-formed  wing  or  tail  feather — a  not-too- 
fluffy  affair.  First  observe  its  general  shape.  Elongated — 
oblong,  is  it  not  ?  Then  draw  in  an  oblong  shape.  Next 
notice  that  it  is  broad  at  the  bottom  end,  and  that  it  inclines 
to  a  rounded  point.     We  will  shape  off  the  side  tips. 

Next  we  trace  the  main  stalk  or  stem  from  which  the  plume 
spreads.     Observe  the  separating  of  the  plume  on  one  side, 

28 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

the  crisp  firmness  of  the  narrower  vein,  the  fluffiness  at  the 
back  of  the  thick  stem,  and  the  solid  firmness  of  the  stem 
itself. 

We  can  work  this  with  a  pencil  and  trace  the  beautiful 
marking  on  the  feather,  or  we  can  produce  our  paint-box 
and  try  to  colour  our  drawing.  It  is  an  excellent  plan  to 
hide  the  model  from  sight,  and  see  how  much,  or  how  little, 
has  penetrated  our  brain. 

Afterward  try  drawing  some  simple  flowers  :  a  snowdrop 
in  a  small  vase  ;  a  crocus — bulb,  stem,  and  flower  ;  a  daffodil 
with  a  few  broad  spear-like  leaves. 

And  if  we  find  it  difficult  to  interpret  shapes  with  our  pencil, 
and  our  brain  tires,  and  our  fingers  get  weary,  choose  some 
very  different  and  '  opposite '  shapes. 

The  mere  task  of  choosing  requires  a  little  stimulating 
reflection. 

For  instance,  contrast  a  flat,  squat-shaped,  circular  inkpot 
with  a  small,  narrow  upright  tumbler ;  a  big  spoon  w\th  a 
broad-handled  knife.  Compare  a  lemon  with  a  tangerine  ; 
an  egg  with  an  apple  ;  a  reel  of  cotton  with  a  tube  of 
water-colour  paint ;  a  matchbox  with  an  ash-tray  ;  a  tall 
slender  vase  and  a  dumpy  bowl ;  a  large  breakfast-cup  and 
a  small  cocoa-tin  ;  a  flat,  thin  book  and  a  sphere-shaped 
paper-weight. 

Put  some  of  these  objects  on  a  table,  at  a  little  distance  from 
your  desk,  and  sketch  them  two  by  two,  and  side  by  side. 

You  could  draw  some  with  your  pencil,  and  some  with  your 
brush. 

The  lemon  and  the  tangerine  are  excellent  subjects  for  this 
test,  because  you  have  contrast  of  both  shape  and  colour. 

If  you  sketch  them  first  with  your  brush,  choose  a  tint  of 
which  they  are  both  composed — say,  a  very  pale  yellow. 

Draw  first  the  lemon,  the  large,  elongated,  egg-shaped 
variety.  Notice  the  characteristic  knob,  like  a  nose,  at  one 
end,  and  compare  this  with  the  round  tangerine  and  its 
somewhat  flattened  top.  You  will  find  a  further  interest  in 
comparing  colours.  How  rich  is  the  orange  tinge  beside  the 
24. 


Fig.  3.    Ivy  Leaf  and  Feather 


24 


How  to  Begin 

paler  yellow !  How  deep  the  shadows  of  the  tangerine 
appear  when  compared  with  those  of  the  lighter-hued  lemon  ! 
For  the  lemon  we  must  seek  out  our  cool  blues  and  pale 
golds  ;  for  the  tangerine,  warm  crimson,  and  even  touches 
of  bronze  and  brown. 

If  we  wish  to  handle  our  pencils  intelligently  (to  get  from 
our  pencil  many  varied  touches),  we  should  draw  objects  which 
are  variously  composed.  In  other  words,  made  of  more  than 
one  material.     And  here  again  we  must  don  our  thinking-cap. 

We  need  not  go  very  far.  A  few  homely  domestic  articles 
would  furnish  us  with  some  useful  models. 

Take  a  feather  brush — that  is,  a  brush  composed  of  feathers, 
leather,  and  smooth  polished  wood  ;  hang  this  up  at  a  level 
with  your  eye,  feathers  downward,  and  sketch  it  with  your 
pencil. 

Draw  a  long  line  to  represent  the  handle,  and  indicate  the 
rough  fan-shape  of  the  lower  part.  If  the  handle  is  grooved 
and  turned,  do  not  worry  because  you  cannot  get  both 
sides  exactly  alike.  First  sketch  the  largest  shapes  and  re- 
member to  keep  the  stick  slender ;  next  the  three-cornered 
piece  of  leather  which  neatly  hides  and  binds  the  ends  of  the 
feathers  together  ;  lastly,  the  feathers  themselves,  spreading 
out  in  a  loose,  plumy  fan. 

Having  sketched  these  shapes,  darken  the  handle,  which 
is  polished  and  black.  Leave  the  white  paper  to  show  through 
to  provide  the  lights.  Try  to  represent  the  polish  of  the 
surface  by  drawing  with  firm  sharp  touches. 

The  leather,  being  of  a  more  pliable  material  and  of  a  duller 
surface,  needs  a  lighter  treatment.  If  it  has  a  dull  tint, 
give  it  a  shaded  tone  ;  if  it  has  folds,  draw  these  folds  in 
shadow. 

Next  the  feathers. 

A  feather  is  one  of  the  lightest  of  all  substances.  We  say 
"  light  as  a  feather  "  when  we  wish  to  suggest  something  of 
the  airiest  description. 

But  although  it  is  so  unsubstantial,  it  is  not  feeble.  It 
has  a  definite  shape. 

25 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

Each  feather  has  a  spine  from  which  it  spreads  in  a  definite 
shape.  Soft,  yes,  and  dehcate,  but  with  a  curved  spine  and 
a  broad  tip.  Look  at  those  nearest  to  you  .  .  .  and  draw 
their  shapes  dehcately.  Hold  your  pencil  lightly,  give  a 
gentle,  feathery  touch,  and,  as  the  feathers  are  bunched 
together,  and  some  will  be  in  shadow,  put  in  the  shadows 
lightly,  but  sharply.     Then  pause  and  look  at  your  drawing. 

Have  you  '  handled  '  the  drawing  of  the  wood  and  the 
feathers  differently  ?  Does  the  leather  look  more  substantial 
than  the  feathers  ? 

The  work  is  not  easy,  but  practice  will  soon  give  a  surer 
touch.  You  are  playing  a  scale  with  your  pencil  as  one  plays 
a  scale  on  a  piano.  Deep  bass  notes,  then  the  middle  strong 
notes,  and  lastly  the  soft  delicate  treble.  We  must  try  to 
make  our  pencil  speak  with  a  varied  tongue. 

Drawing  different  textures  might  include  a  kettle  and  a 
kettle-holder  (shiny  metal — rough  cloth  or  velvet) ;  a  small 
piece  of  fur  coiled  near,  or  over,  a  hard  cricket-ball ;  a  cake 
of  soap  and  a  loofah.  A  woman's  hat  with  a  soft  wide  brim 
(not  the  pudding  basin  variety,  which  is  most  difficult  for 
unpractised  fingers),  trimmed  with  a  cluster  of  berries,  or  a 
twisted  bow  of  ribbon,  gives  us  several  different  textures. 

We  must  hold  the  pencil  delicately,  loosely,  and  half-way 
up  the  shaft  if  we  wish  to  convey  the  delicacy  of  fur  and 
fine  hairs.  If  we  would  show  the  richness  of  velvet,  we  must 
use  our  pencil  with  determination  and  shift  our  fingers  for 
a  shorter  and  firmer  grip. 

All  this  will  come  with  practice.  There  is  no  need  to  worry 
yourself  with  harassing  doubts.  Do  your  best ;  no  one  can 
do  more. 

When  we  work  alone,  we  are  very  apt  to  get  weary  and 
depressed  with  our  difficulties. 

We  sit  before  our  little  models  and  look  so  often  that  we 
see  less  and  less,  instead  of  more  and  more. 

It  is  very  wise  occasionally  to  cover  up  your  model,  or,  at 
any  rate,  to  turn  your  back  upon  it  for  a  while. 

This  will  often  appear  to  increase  your  difficulties,  but 
26 


Fig.  4r.    Models  illustrating  Varied  Shapes  and  Textures 


26 


How  to  Begin 

it  will  tend  to  quicken  your  observation,  and  this  is  worth 
any  extra  trouble  or  discouragement  that  may  be  entailed. 
There  is  a  temptation  to  look  continually  at  our  models,  and 
in  consequence  we  look  at  them  more  often  than  is  necessary. 
If,  after  looking  at  the  model,  we  hide  it  from  sight  and 
then  proceed  with  our  drawing,  obviously  we  must  work  from 
memory.  The  habit  of  working  without  models  is  soon 
developed,  and  it  adds  enormously  to  our  powers  of  '  taking 
notice.' 


27 


CHAPTER  II 

Drawing  our  Toys 

WHEN  we  are  very  small  nothing  seems  too  difficult 
for  our  pencil.  If  we  wish  to  draw  a  tree,  a  horse, 
or  an  engine,  we  make  no  bones  about  the  matter, 
we  draw  it.  Possibly  the  drawings  may  look  rather  quaint 
in  the  eyes  of  other  people,  but  they  satisfy  ourselves. 

And  behind  these  quaint  early  drawings  lies,  more  often 
than  not,  a  sound  and  practical  line  of  reasoning. 

You  know,  for  instance,  how  fond  is  Baby  John  of  drawing 
an  engine  in  full  steam. 

"  My  fain,"  he  will  say,  proudly  pointing  to  a  piece  of 
paper  covered  with  whirligigs  of  pencil. 

He's  right  enough,  I  dare  say.  Did  he  not  begin  by  draw- 
ing a  queer  bit  of  shed,  some  odd-looking  wheels,  and  perhaps 
even  a  coconut  thing  with  a  few  straight  lines  meant  for  the 
engine-driver's  features  ?  And  always  he  drew  the  shape  of 
a  funnel.  And  then  .  .  .  his  fancy  ran  riot !  Out  of  the 
funnel  came  smoke  !  Lots  and  lots  of  smoke  !  Wasn't  the 
train  the  puff-puff  of  his  infancy  ?  Pujf-piijf-'pujf  came  the 
smoke.  It  was  glorious  drawing  !  Everything  was  covered 
in  smoke. 

He  showed  you  his  train,  and,  in  all  probability,  you 
laughed,  as  I  might  have  done  in  your  place. 

And  yet  he  was  doing  what  is  a  very  difficult  thing  to  do, 
he  was  drawing  *  out  of  his  imagination,'  or,  as  some  people 
say,  '  drawing  out  of  his  head.' 

Once,  and  not  a  very  long  time  ago,  I  was  sitting  alone  and 
drawing  in  haste,  when  old  Gary  entered,  curious  and  inquir- 
ing. She  looked  round  the  empty  room,  she  looked  at  me, 
and  she  looked  at  my  paper,  on  which  several  scenes  were 
28 


Drawing  our  Toys 


shaping,  and  then  she  said  :  "  Ah  !  I  see  you  draw  out  of 
your  fancy  !  " 

I  loved  Gary's  expression  "  out  of  your  fancy."  Don't 
you  think  it  far  more  expressive  than  '  drawing  out  of  one's 
head  '  or  '  drawing  from  one's  imagination  '  ? 

Few  of  us  who  are  fond  of  drawing  can  resist,  when  we 
are  young,  drawing  '  out  of  our  fancy.' 

Little  girls  fly  to  the  enchanted  regions  of  Fairy-  and  Flower- 
land,  as  surely  as  little  boys  turn  to  scenes  of  breathless  and 
stirring  adventure,  ships  at  sea  and  ships  in  the  air,  soldiers. 
Red  Indians,  camp-fires,  hunting,  shooting,  and  games  of 
thrilling  interest. 

Little  girls  push  wide  the  enchanted  gates  of  Fairyland. 
Flowers  emitting  tiny  elves,  gnomes  dancing  with  toadstools 
held  aloft,  gorgeous  ladies  on  prancing  steeds  or  in  flower- 
bedizened  motor-cars,  castle  gates  opening  to  the  blast  of  a 
horn  blown  by  a  handsome  prince. 

And  as  we  grow  older  we  cease  to  draw  our  magical  dreams 
— more's  the  pity  1  for  there  will  be  nothing  as  delightful  in 
all  the  sparkling  realms  of  art. 

When  we  become  more  '  practical,'  we  get  more  matter- 
of-fact,  and  we  lose,  unfortunately,  our  early  confidence. 

Sometimes,  see-sawing  between  the  things  of  '  our  fancy  ' 
and  the  things  that  are  simple  facts,  we  get  disheartened. 

We  are  tempted  then  to  throw  away  our  pencils  and  paint- 
boxes in  disgust,  to  be  discouraged  by  a  smile,  to  be  utterly 
disheartened  by  a  laugh.  And  yet  between  the  beautiful 
Land  of  Fancy  and  the  strange  approaching  Land  of  Fact 
lies  a  simple  bridge  with  a  very  familiar  aspect,  no  more 
nor  less  than  the  companion  of  our  babyhood — the  toy- 
cupboard. 

The  nursery  is  full  of  inviting  little  models,  models  that 
we  have  handled  for  years  and  that  are  as  patient  as  ever. 
Here  I  will  let  you  into  a  secret.  It  is  comparatively  easy 
to  draw  the  things  with  which  we  are  familiar.  The  boy  who 
has  made  a  footstool  will  probably  draw  it  far  better  than  the 
boy  who  has  never  driven  a  nail.     And  it  is  an  excellent 

29 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

thing,  when  we  draw  an  object,  to  take  it  up  and  examine  it, 
whether  it  be  leaf,  feather,  footstool,  chair,  or  toys. 

If  we  draw  our  toys  now,  toy  girl,  toy  horse,  toy  tree,  later  we 
shall  be  able  to  draw  real  girl,  real  horse,  and  real  tree  ;  con- 
fident because  we  have  a  little  knowledge  to  help  us  on  our  way. 

The  toy  tree  is  stiff  and  still,  but  has  the  look  of  a  tree  ; 
Mr  Noah  is  straight  and  long,  but  Mr  Noah  is  a  man  and  he 
has  sheep,  cows,  pigs,  and  birds  ;  though  made  of  wood,  these 
have  a  queer  resemblance  to  their  originals. 

For  a  beginning  let  us  take  these  little  creatures  and  place 
them  in  procession  along  the  table,  the  ark  in  front,  and 
then,  with  our  sketch-books  on  our  knees  (some  stiff  bit  of 
board  beneath  it  if  it  be  a  limp-covered  book),  sit  on  a  low 
seat  at  the  extreme  right-hand  side  of  our  models,  and  with 
our  eyes  on  a  level  with  the  table. 

As  in  the  preceding  chapter  we  experimented  with  the 
different  shapes  of  our  models,  so  we  will  begin  by  noting 
that  these  little  ark  creatures  vary  in  shape. 

Having  drawn  them  with  pencil,  we  could  then  take  up 
our  paint-brush  and  paint  them  in  gay  colours,  making  a 
long  narrow-shaped  picture,  a  kind  of  frieze,  or  border. 

What  could  be  easier  to  draw  than  Mr  Noah  himself  ? 
He  is  just  a  straight  angular  shape  in  several  sections. 
The  first  and  top  section  makes  a  queer  little  hat.  The 
second — an  oval  shape — a  face.  The  third  section  slopes 
outward  from  his  wooden  neck  to  provide  his  body  and  then, 
slightly  indenting  at  the  waist,  continues  in  a  straight  robe  to 
his  feet,  where  we  have  the  fourth  section — wider  than  the 
others — the  stand  upon  which  he  is  balanced. 

After  we  have  finished  with  Mr  Noah  we  might  proceed  to 
draw  the  animals.  A  sheep  has  a  long-shaped  body  perched 
upon  four  straight  little  legs,  a  thick  tail,  and  possibly  two 
erectly  pricked  ears.  The  pig  has  a  more  drooping  head,  a 
thicker  neck,  shorter  legs. 

But  I  need  not  discuss  the  details  of  each  one.     The  fore- 
going suggestions  will  enable  you  to  apply  the  same  principles 
to  all. 
30 


Drawing  our  Toys 


A  toy  tree  might  well  bring  up  the  rear  of  our  procession. 
And  a  toy  tree  is  a  very  simple  affair,  a  thimble-shape  on  the 
end  of  a  stick,  very  like  a  large  T  with  elongated  lines  drooping 
on  either  side. 

Looking  at  the  tree  as  a  whole  mass  we  see  that  the 
branches  extend  more  than  half-way  down  the  stem.  Lightly 
we  sketch  the  line  of  these  branches.  Then  we  look  at  the 
trunk  of  the  tree.  It  is  thick  and  solid  for  its  height.  Then 
thick  and  solid  we  will  draw  it.  Next  we  come  to  its  little 
green  stand,  like  a  sUce  of  the  one  which  supports  Mr  Noah, 
and  this  stand  is  smaller  than  the  circumference  of  the  tree 
at  the  widest  part. 

Baby  Tom's  unbreakable  Bunny  is  surely  the  simplest  of 
all  shapes — a  flat  base  from  which  rises  a  rounded  hill, 
steeper  on  one  side  than  on  the  other.  The  steeper,  more 
massive  end  corresponds  with  the  crouching  hind-legs  (which 
we  know  to  be  the  largest  part  of  the  rabbit  and  which  help 
him  to  run  so  fleetly  across  the  warren). 

From  the  top  of  the  head  the  ears  lie  flat  along  the  body. 
Then  we  mark  the  small  eye,  the  rounded  soft  nose,  and  the 
tiny  forepaws.  We  look  for  folds  of  leg,  paw,  and  ear,  and 
we  shade  these  with  a  light  but  firm  touch.  Bunny  Rabbit  is 
white  and  therefore  must  not  be  shaded  too  strongly.  And 
if  you  wish  to  insist  on  his  white  coat,  look  for  shadows  cast 
by  his  rounded  body  on  the  ground  or  background. 

The  fish  of  painted  celluloid  is  interesting  and  by  no  means 
difficult  to  draw,  although  at  first  glance  we  may  be  slightly 
puzzled  where  and  how  to  begin. 

A  fish  is  long — one  almost  might  term  it  domino-shape. 
Begin,  then,  as  always,  by  sketching  out  this  general 
shape. 

This  done,  we  trace  from  the  wider  and  larger  end  of  the 
fish  the  long  sloping  line  to  the  branching  tail.  The  forepart 
slopes  steeply  down  from  the  '  shoulders  '  and  finishes  with  a 
rounded  blunt  nose.  Next  we  notice  that  our  fish — unlike  a 
real  fish — has  a  flattened  underside  upon  which  he  rests  on 
flat  surfaces — and  this  we  draw. 

31 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

After  this  we  proceed  to  sketch  the  gills,  the  curious 
breathing-apparatus  of  the  fish,  placed  on  either  side  of  his 
head  and  behind  his  cheek. 

Then  we  note  the  eye — circular  in  shape  (not  oblong  like  a 
human  eye) — and  the  queer  scoop  of  a  mouth  with  the  lower 
jaw  jutting  forward.  We  then  sketch  the  tail,  which  is 
forked. 

If  we  feel  so  disposed  we  can  sketch  a  few  of  the  fish's 
scales  ;  they  overlap,  beginning  at  the  head  and  diminishing 
in  size  with  the  diminishing  size  of  the  tail-end  of  the  body* 

We  may  also  build  up  a  picture  with  a  group  of  several 
fishes  drawn  from  the  single  model. 

Turn  the  fish  round,  so  that  the  head  comes  nearest.  This 
will  not  be  so  easy  to  draw,  because  here  we  are  confronted 
with  something  that  is  not  on  a  flat  plane.  But  do  not  let 
this  worry  you.  When  we  are  sketching  something  '  coming 
toward  us  '  we  draw  first  the  part  that  is  nearest,  then  the 
parts  behind. 

If  you  draw  two  or  three  or  even  four  fishes  you  might  add 
a  swirl  of  water,  and  some  reeds.  Then  you  will  have  com- 
pleted a  little  picture. 

Observe  real  ponds  and  reeds  at  your  next  opportunity, 
and  if  a  fish  darts  before  your  eyes  you  will  see  that  his  fins 
and  tail  agitate  the  water. 

By  observing  and  remembering — we  cannot  always  have 
a  pencil  in  our  hand — we  build  up  pictures  in  our  minds. 

Teddy  Bear  might  next  pose  as  a  model. 

He  has  a  rounded  head  and  a  pointed  snout.  These  we 
sketch  very  roughly — something  like  the  shape  of  a  pear. 

He  has  a  round,  fat,  pillow-shaped  body,  to  which  are 
attached  his  fat  little  thighs,  the  backward-sloping  hind-legs, 
and  his  small  but  solid  feet  thrust  sturdily  forward.  To  the  top 
of  his  head  we  must  add  his  large,  soft,  round  ears.  The  front 
part  of  his  forehead  curves  in  a  decided  kink,  and  his  queer 
little  snout  soars  upward.  His  nose  is  black  and  shiny,  and 
the  noses  of  bears  are  three-corner  shape,  wide  at  the  top,  curl- 
ing round  the  nostrils  and  narrowing  to  the  upper  lip.  The 
32 


Fig.  5.   Various  Toys 


32 


Drawing  our  Toys 


lower  jaw  of  Teddy  Bear  is  small  and  retreating,  and  his  mouth 
curves  upward  in  a  pleased  little  smile. 

His  upper  arms  are  very  thick,  and  they  scoop  downward 
and  outward  and  end  in  rounded  paws.  Teddy  Bear  might 
carry  our  study  further.  In  all  probability  he  will  wear  a 
coat  or  tunic.  Then  draw  the  little  garment  carefully.  Draw 
the  folds  under  the  arms,  and  the  belt  round  the  waist,  and  the 
pattern  about  the  edge  of  it. 

Teddy  Bear  is  different  from  the  wooden  creatures  of  the 
ark  or  the  velveteen  of  Bunny  Rabbit.     He  has  a  furry  coat. 

Try  to  indicate  with  several  strokes  of  the  pencil  the  furry 
shadows  in  his  ears,  behind  his  ears,  in  the  bend  of  his  arms 
and  legs,  and  the  shaggy  little  fringe  of  his  paws  and  hind-legs. 

Draw  the  furry  lines  lightly.  His  coat  is  of  a  soft  substance. 
Draw  some  of  the  thick  curls  with  their  queer  little  twists, 
and  the  shadows  on  the  curve  of  the  ragged  edges. 

His  eye  is  dark  and  bright.  It  has  a  shiny  light,  being  of 
a  shiny  substance.  Draw  the  dark  shadow  of  the  little  eye 
with  strong,  dark  touches,  leaving  the  light  untouched. 

There,  you  see,  we  have  the  fur  of  the  coat,  the  velvet  of 
the  dress,  and  the  button  of  an  eye.  Three  different  sub- 
stances requiring  different  handling  of  the  pencil. 

Dobbin,  who  has  carried  us  so  many  miles  round  the 
nursery-floor  that  all  his  tail  and  most  of  his  mane  has 
sprinkled  the  highway  of  our  fancy,  Dobbin,  after  all  is  said 
and  done,  is  a  horse.  He  has  four  legs,  a  stout  body,  an 
arched  neck,  and  a  spirited  eye  and  nostril. 

See  how  smooth  and  round  is  his  body,  and  how  firmly 
the  four  legs  are  fastened  to  the  corners,  and  how  squarely 
the  neck  is  placed  !  His  hoofs  are  stoutly  fixed  on  the  ground, 
the  left  fore-leg  and  the  right  hind-leg  stepping  forward. 

First  note  the  barrel  shape  of  his  body  and  draw  that 
firmly,  placing  the  legs  at  each  corner  and  simply  marking 
the  angle  from  the  top  of  the  leg  to  the  hoof.  Then  place  the 
curved  neck  on  the  square  shoulders  and  trace  the  long  face. 
(The  '  horse-faced  individual,'  a  rude  nickname  we  some- 
times hear,  suggests  a  man  or  woman  with  a  very  long  face.) 
c  83 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

You  may  now  place  the  saddle  on  Dobbin's  back,  because  (we 
are  now  looking  for  more  details)  the  triangular  shape  of  the 
saddle  throws  a  shadow  and  marks  the  curve  of  his  flank. 

Compare  the  various  thicknesses  of  Dobbin's  fore-legs. 
The  width  of  the  upper  part,  the  firm  square  swelling  of  the 
knees,  the  narrowing  of  the  fetlock,  the  curve  and  forward 
thrust  of  the  fetlock,  and  neat  little  black  hoofs.  The  hind- 
legs  have  a  very  decided  and  firm  sweep  backward. 

The  bridle  is  useful.  The  cheek-strap  marks  the  thickest 
part  of  the  horse's  head,  the  frontal  strap  gives  the  width  of 
the  forehead,  the  long  straight  side-strap  throws  a  shadow 
under  the  funny  little  painted  eye  and  down  the  cheek. 

It  now  only  remains  to  draw  his  long  thin  face,  and  his 
rounded  nostril,  and  his  mouth  open  to  receive  the  bit  which 
has  long  since  disappeared,  and  his  two  ears  pricked  intelli- 
gently forward.  He  has  all  the  '  points  '  of  a  good  horse,  has 
Dobbin  ! 

And  surely  among  all  our  scalped  darlings  there  will  be  one 
fair  lady  to  sit  for  her  portrait.  Primrose,  who  never  closes 
her  blue  orbs,  though  she  is  rocked  until  her  small  mistress's 
arms  ache  with  fatigue,  and  Dahlia,  proud,  snub-nosed,  and 
long-bodied.  Primrose  has  a  real  dolly  face,  rosy  cheeks, 
big  round  staring  eyes,  arched  eyebrows,  and  pouting  lips. 
We  might  do  worse  than  study  Primrose.  Her  eyes  are 
glassy  and  stuck  in  oblong  sockets ;  beyond  that  they  have 
no  more  than  a  general  resemblance  to  human  eyes.  But 
Primrose  has  not  such  an  ill-proportioned  body  as  some  of 
her  little  doll-sisters,  though  her  legs  are  stiff,  and  her  arms  are 
absurdly  small. 

Sketch  first  her  large  head,  then  her  long  body,  the  angles 
of  her  plump  legs,  and  her  tiny  arms.  Roughly  mark  the 
position  of  nose  and  eyes,  the  shape  of  the  bobbed  locks  cut 
squarely  across  the  brow  and  at  the  level  of  the  ear.  Look 
at  the  length  of  the  tunic,  the  skirt,  and  the  socks,  the  edge 
of  the  sleeve  folds  under  the  arm.  The  feet  being  slightly 
upturned  expose  the  tiniest  slip  of  the  sole  of  the  shoes. 

When  you  have  the  head  on  paper,  then  you  can  mark 
84 


Fig.  6.    Toy  Horse  and  Doll 


34 


Drawing  our  Toys 

the  features ;  arched  eyebrows,  tiny  nose,  dimpled  chin,  and 
absurdly  fat  apple-dumpling  cheeks. 

Observe  the  large  sockets  of  the  staring  eyes,  the  tiny  pink 
lips. 

Shade  in  the  soft  hair,  and  note  that  it  clings  to  the  shape 
of  the  head,  and  the  ends  are  fluffy. 

The  velvet  tunic  sticks  out  at  the  hips,  and  the  fur  edging 
on  the  skirt  just  covers  the  knees. 

Mark  that  the  upper  edge  of  the  sock  follows  the  curve  of 
the  fat  legs,  and  notice  also  the  curious  dimpled  fingers  that 
seem  proper  to  the  little  girl  doll. 

Don't  trouble  too  much  about  detail.  Draw  the  chief 
things  and  let  the  others  slide.  And  having  proceeded  step 
by  step  from  wooden  toy  to  waxen  doll,  we  might  next  con- 
sider certain  little  people  of  more  importance — ourselves. 


35 


CHAPTER  III 

Drawing  Ourselves  and  Others 

WHEN  we  first  try  to  draw  each  other  it  is  best 
to  choose  fairly  easy  positions.  Put  your  small 
brother  into  an  exaggerated  attitude — for  example, 
rushing  toward  you  with  arms  outspread,  his  chin  in  the  air. 
You  will  very  soon  get  tired  "and  discouraged  ;  worse  still,  so 
will  he,  and  the  probabilities  are  that  his  first  posing  will  be 
his  last. 

So  choose  an  easy  position.  Firstly  for  his  sake,  secondly 
for  yours.  It  does  not  pay  to  be  too  selfish  about  these  things, 
and  posing,  after  all  is  said  and  done,  is  very  monotonous 
work.  Queer  aches  and  pains  develop  in  hands,  knees,  and 
feet.  Extended  arms  holding  banners  or  grasping  trusty 
swords  are  apt  to  get  heavy  as  lead.  So  I  offer  it  to  you  as 
an  invaluable  principle,  consider  the  feelings  of  your  model. 

By  '  an  easy  pose '  one  that  represents  a  simple  position  is 
meant.  If  we  begin  by  trying  to  draw  some  one  with  body 
huddled  together,  legs  crossed,  neck  twisted,  and  eyes  gazing 
into  ours,  we  shall  soon  be  very  confused. 

Stand  your  brother  upright,  with  his  arms  to  his  side  ;  or 
put  your  sister  on  a  chair  with  her  hands  in  her  lap  and  her 
eyes  looking  before  her  ;  or  plump  the  baby  down  on  a  cushion 
on  the  floor  and  draw  him  sideways  (he  won't  stay  there,  but 
that  is  a  detail).     Choose,  in  a  word,  easy  positions. 

It  is  a  very  encouraging  reflection  that  all  people  who 
aspire  to  become  artists  are  more  or  less  in  the  same  boat. 
We  land  on  the  same  rocks,  reefs,  and  shore,  we  battle  with 
the  same  currents,  tides,  and  storms.  We  should,  therefore, 
be  ready  with  a  helping  hand  whenever  it  is  required  by 
others. 
36 


Drawing  Ourselves  and  Others 

"  I  will  sit  to  you  if  you  will  sit  to  me,"  my  brothers  would 
say.  As  there  were  two  brothers  and  one  sister,  all  fond  of 
drawing,  we  formed  a  Triple  Alliance,  and  posed  to  each  other 
in  turn. 

So  we  will  begin  with  simple  poses. 

A  hint  here  as  to  the  size  of  our  sketches  may  not  come 
amiss.  Do  not  draw  on  too  small  a  scale.  A  sketch  of  a 
figure  the  height  of  your  thumb  will  not  teach  you  very  much. 
Moreover,  one  is  too  apt  to  adopt  a  niggling,  worried  style  of 
drawing.  Take  a  good-sized  sheet  of  paper  and  try  to  make 
your  sketch  as  large  as  the  length  of  your  hand. 

Shall  we  assume  that  Kathleen  has  kindly  agreed  to  sit  to 
us  for  fifteen  minutes  ?  Let  us  place  her  on  a  stool  on  which 
she  can  sit  upright  and  in  a  steady  suffused  light — not  too 
near  the  window,  the  fire,  the  electric,  gas,  or  lamp  light,  all 
of  which  tend  to  throw  confusing  lights  and  shadows.  Then 
we  give  Kathleen  a  searching  look — not  too  long — and  we 
ask  ourselves  what  shape  does  Kathleen,  roughly  speaking, 
present  ?  She  forms  a  triangular  shape.  Yes.  See  the  line 
of  the  back,  the  line  of  the  upper  leg,  the  line  of  the  leg  from 
the  knee  to  the  foot,  and  the  upright  supports  of  the  stool. 

Having  seen,  we  record  our  impressions — lightly — for  after 
all  they  are  but  first  impressions,  and  we  don't  want  to  make 
harsh  lines  that  can  be  erased  only  by  much  rubbing  and 
spoiling  of  paper. 

Next  we  consider  the  angles  we  have  made  and  compare 
with  Kathleen.  We  see  that  the  angles  are  softened  into 
curves,  the  forward  thrust  of  the  neck,  the  curve  of  the  spine 
and  upper  part  of  the  leg.  We  might  note  the  position  of  the 
hands  on  the  lap  (they  are  not  on  the  extreme  edge  of  the 
knee),  and  we  could  look  again  at  the  head  and  indicate 
the  roundness  of  the  upper  side,  the  comparatively  flat  oval 
of  the  face,  and  the  hood-like  shape  of  Kathleen's  short  mane. 

Now  we  are  searching  for  more  detail.  I  know  you  are 
dying  to  give  her  a  nose,  eye,  and  mouth.  Well,  trace  these 
details  lightly  and  do  not  labour  the  eyelashes — we  have 
something  more  important  in  hand. 

87 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

Next  we  might  note  the  arm.  Turn  up  the  sleeve  if  the 
elbow  is  hidden.  Hinges  or  joints  are  very  important,  and 
the  more  we  see  of  them  the  better  we  shall  understand  the 
working  of  the  human  frame.  Kathleen  has  a  thin  but 
shapely  little  arm,  the  upper  surface  of  which  is  gently 
rounded  and  the  lower  straighter  and  firmer  because  of  the 
bones  beneath.  The  thumb  rises  to  a  point,  and  the  fingers 
fall  outward  more  or  less  in  the  shape  of  a  fan.  The  position 
of  this  hand  is  very  simple.  But  ten  to  one,  if  the  pose  has 
been  left  to  Kathleen's  choice,  she  has  clasped  her  fingers 
tightly  together,  for  that  is  a  very  natural  thing  to  do  with 
an  unoccupied  pair  of  hands.  And  clasped  hands  are  very 
difficult  to  draw.  One  invariably  makes  them  far  too  large. 
It  is  not  easy  to  fit  four  fingers  and  a  thumb  on  that  small 
thing  called  a  palm  until  we  have  gained  experience. 

Having  arrived  at  the  arms  and  hands  we  continue  with 
the  lower  limbs,  tucking  in  the  skirt  (folds  can  be  very  mis- 
leading) to  show  the  upper  part  of  the  thigh.  The  square 
angle  resting  upon  the  seat  of  the  stool  is  sharply  defined. 
The  knee  is  more  or  less  hidden,  but  ask  Kathleen  to  touch 
the  knees  where  they  bend,  or  hold  the  skirt  tightly  across 
the  knees,  and  mark  it  well  in  your  mind,  or  on  your  paper, 
because  from  there  we  trace  the  lower  part  of  the  leg. 

Now  we  follow  the  curve  of  the  leg,  noticing  the  flat  surface 
of  the  front  part  compared  with  the  calf.  Your  Kathleen 
may  not  have  as  much  calf  as  my  Kathleen.  Girls  have  very 
often  the  thinnest  of  arms  and  legs,  and  it  is  a  common  mistake 
to  give  too  much  flesh.  Next  we  draw  the  feet.  The  boat- 
shape  of  the  foot  seen  in  profile  (or  sideways)  is  broken  up 
with  the  strap,  which  marks  also  the  thickest  part  of  the  foot, 
the  instep.  From  that  curve  it  descends  steeply  to  the  root 
of  the  toes  or  the  curve  of  the  shoe  proper.  Stout,  sensible 
shoes  has  Kathleen,  and  the  sole  and  heel  are  easily  traced, 
marked  as  they  are  with  the  shadows  of  the  leather. 

Lastly,  note  the  most  important  shadows  and  folds  ;    also 
the  hair,  neckband,  cuffs,  or  doubled-back  sleeves — just  so 
far  as  your  interest  carries  you,  but  no  further. 
88 


38 


Drawing  Ourselves  and  Others 

And  so  we  have  Kathleen  down  on  paper.  She  deserves 
our  thanks,  and  if  she  laughs,  as  she  probably  will,  and 
exclaims,  "  Oh,  how  queer  I  look  in  your  drawing  !  "  you  can 
tell  her  that  if  she  will  only  sit  to  us  fairly  often,  we  will 


I 

Fig.  8.  The  Balancinq  of  Moving  Figurks 

improve  and  hope  some  day  to  make  her  as  nice-looking  as 
she  would  wish. 

Now  what  about  Jack — do  you  think  he  would  care  to  sit 
for  his  picture  ? 

Jack  being  a  gentleman  full  of  frolic  will  probably  like 
to  pose  in  more  or  less  spirited  action.  Why  not  ?  If  he 
wishes  to  peer  aft  across  the  good  kitchen  chair  with  his  back 
toward  us,  we  shall  probably  find  it  is  no  more  difficult  to 
draw  him  thus  than  from  a  side  view.  His  energy  may  be 
a  spur  to  ours. 

39 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

There  is  one  fact  about  standing  figures  that  you  must 
always  bear  in  mind.     They  must  balance. 

You  will  probably  say  with  a  smile  you  are  quite  certain 
of  that  without  any  reminder.  But  I  am  inclined  to  think 
that  young  artists  are  very  unobservant,  or  else  uncommonly 
careless,  so  often  do  we  note  a  lack  of  balance  in  their  pictures. 

And  you  can  see  for  yourself,  artist  or  no  artist,  that  if 
you  throw  yourself  into  an  attitude,  and  lose  your  balance, 
you  will  come  with  a  crash  to  the  ground. 

Your  heel,  or  toe,  or  whatever  happens  to  be  your  support, 
must  come  under  the  centre  of  your  spinal  column. 

In  Fig.  8  are  shown  a  couple  of  silhouettes  of  figures  in  action 
to  emphasize  this  principle.  Suppose  you  were  hopping  on  one 
leg,  or  dancing  on  your  toe,  or  standing  upright  with  your 
arms  above  your  head,  and  Michael  or  Peter  gave  you  a 
push,  as  brothers  sometimes  do,  you  would  at  once  lose  your 
balance — and  the  figure  in  your  drawing  will  overbalance  if 
you  do  not  rightly  plant  him  upon  whatever  is  to  support 
him. 

Therefore,  as  soon  as  we  have  sketched  in  the  angles  of 
Jack  draw  a  faint  line  down  the  centre  from  the  back  or  half- 
centre  of  the  neck,  and  this  should  reach  the  ball  of  the  right 
foot.  (Jack  is  depending  on  the  chair  with  his  left  leg,  and 
he  could  therefore  lean  backward  or  forward  without  losing 
his  balance.) 

First  we  glean  a  general  idea  of  the  big  angles  of  the  body, 
and  the  broad,  sweeping  line  of  the  spine,  the  bending  thigh 
and  leg,  and  the  standing  leg  and  foot  (in  my  sketch  drawn 
on  a  smaller  scale).  Then  we  follow  the  angles,  and  find  they 
break  into  large  simple  curves.  We  trace  the  great  curve  of 
the  body,  its  backward  thrust,  the  width  of  shoulders,  and 
the  comparatively  narrow  width  across  the  hips,  the  thick 
curve  of  the  thigh  and  its  narrowing  line  to  where  the  knee 
bends  on  the  chair,  the  curve  of  the  calf,  and  the  flatter  line 
of  the  knee  to  the  foot  where  it  bends  downward  in  a  great 
spoon-shaped  curve.  The  right  leg  has  far  more  delicate 
curves.  The  calf  and  upper  thigh  are  drawn  taut  with  the 
40 


FijT.  9.    Jack 


40 


Drawing  Ourselves  and  Others 

very  upright  position.  (If  you  stand  in  this  position  you  can 
feel  the  strain  of  the  sinews  at  the  back  of  the  knee  and  the 
ankle.)  The  ankle  tapers  and  the  toe  of  the  foot  is  turned 
outward,  and  thus  we  see  both  the  back  of  the  heel  and  the 
broad  toe  turned  away  in  shape  something  like  the  bow  of  a 
boat. 

Having  noted  the  main  forms  and  their  relation  to  each 
other,  we  can  next  devote  ourselves  to  detail.  The  line  of 
the  hair  follows  the  upper  part  of  the  round  bullet-shaped 
head.  The  ear  is  valuable,  coming  as  it  does  at  the  meeting 
of  the  jaw  and  skull,  and  we  note  the  tiny  niche  where  the 
neck  rises  above  the  collar. 

Now  we  can  mark  down  the  big  shadows — under  the  loose 
sleeve  of  the  shirt,  at  the  waistbelt,  between  the  legs  and  the 
folds  at  the  back  of  the  knickerbockers,  at  the  knee,  and 
beneath  the  heels.  We  follow  the  grip  of  the  hand  on  the 
chair,  remembering  that  something  solid  and  big  flattens  and 
pushes  out  the  palm.  The  uplifted  right  arm  is  turned  from 
us.  We  can  see — and  it  is  all  that  we  can  see — the  small 
apex  of  the  bending  arm,  the  round  edge  of  the  elbow  as  it 
bends  upward  and  outward,  the  folds  on  the  inner  part  of 
the  sleeve,  and  the  tips  of  the  fingers  resting  on  the  brow. 
After  which  you  can  carry  on  with  anything  that  holds  your 
interest.  But  keep  your  sketch  a  sketch.  Do  not  worry  after 
details.  You  will  learn  more  at  this  stage  from  making 
sketches  of  quick  poses  and  getting  a  knowledge  of  general 
proportions  than  by  delving  after  detail. 

Also  you  could  reverse  the  positions  of  Kathleen  and  Jack. 
Kathleen  might  stand  in  the  same  pose  as  Jack,  and  Jack 
might  sit  on  the  stool. 

And  it  is  very  amusing  to  dress  brother  and  sister  in  their 
elders'  clothes. 

Give  Kathleen  a  shawl  and  a  handkerchief  folded  three- 
corner-wise  and  tied  under  her  chin,  put  a  basket  at  her 
feet,  a  closed  umbrella  in  her  hands,  and  we  have  an  old 
market  woman.  Only  remember  that  we  bend  with  age, 
our  head  droops,  our  arms  sag  forward,  and  our  toes  very 

41 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

probably  would  turn  in  a  little  after  long  years  of  weary 
plodding. 

It  is  amusing  to  play  with  one's  fancy,  to  bring  out  our 
colour-box  and  make  a  fresh  drawing,  tinting  clothes,  hair, 
and  face. 

Put  the  '  old  lady '  against  a  plain  background,  a  wall,  for 
instance,  and  begin  by  sketching  the  whole  figure  (as  we 
sketched  Kathleen  as  herself).  That  is,  the  simple  angles, 
the  big  curves,  then  the  smaller  shapes 
of  head,  face,  arms,  hands,  shawl,  apron, 
feet ;  lastly,  the  details  of  hair,  folds, 
features,  fingers. 

If  you  decide  to  colour  your  picture  of 
the  market  woman,  choose  pleasing  colours, 
/  Kt^     Ny""^       tints  that  will  blend  pleasantly. 
//In      rV"^  ^^  *^^^   French  peasant  woman  would 

wJl  #      y^Ts.        i^g  dressed  probably  in  greys  and  blues, 
whereas   a  gipsy   woman    would    have   a 
highly  coloured  handkerchief  and  shawl. 
Jack    might    dress    up    as    a    shepherd 
The  mISet' Woman     (^^^h  a  long   cloak    or  plaid    across    his 
shoulder,  and   a   staff   in   his   hand,   and 
his  knee  on  a  rock)  scanning  the  rough  pasture  ground  for 
sheep  that  have  strayed. 

But  beware  ! — draperies,  cloaks,  and  plaids  are  very  mis- 
leading. 

We  are  inclined  to  '  lose  '  the  drawing  of  a  leg,  arm,  or 
figure  when  we  are  trying  to  sketch  draperies.  The  folds 
deceive  the  eye.  The  fall  of  a  cloak  may  hide  the  position 
of  a  foot  or  an  arm.  If  such  is  the  case,  then  remove  the 
drapery,  make  a  note  of  the  particular  object  about  which 
you  have  doubts,  and  replace. 

Should  you  prefer  to  leave  the  folds  untouched  because 
they  are  happily  arranged,  take  a  walk  round  your  model 
and  look  at  the  hidden  object  from  the  opposite  side.  Never 
hesitate  to  survey  the  thing  that  you  are  drawing  from  a 
different  angle.  It  is  a  common  fault  to  worry  over  a  detail, 
42 


Drawing  Ourselves  and  Others 

to  labour  a  difficult  problem,  when  a  glance  in  another  posi- 
tion would  make  everything  perfectly  plain. 

To  return  to  the  shepherd. 

The  colouring  of  the  old  shepherd's  clothes  should  be  more 
or  less  decided  by  his  surroundings.  One  would  not  for  choice 
give  him  a  scarlet  plaid  and  a  Prussian  blue  kilt.  These 
colours  would  soon  fly  in  the  mists  of  early  dawn,  the  long 
days  of  rain  and  storm.  A  shepherd's  clothes  would  prob- 
ably share  the  tints  of  the  hills  and  of  the  heather — mauve, 
green,  brown,  and  fawn. 


48 


CHAPTER  IV 

Drawing  Hands 

HANDS  are  excellent  things  on  which  to  practise  draw- 
ing. Firstly,  because  they  are  difficult ;  secondly, 
because  having  two  we  can  always  spare  one  and 
draw  that.  And  we  can  draw  hands  early  and  late.  We 
shall  never  draw  hands  too  often  nor  study  them  too  much. 
It  is  often  said  that  we  can  judge  an  artist's  work  by  the 
drawing  of  the  hands.  If  the  hands  are  good  the  rest  of  the 
work  is  good,  and  if  bad,  then  so  is  the  rest. 

It  is  not  wise  to  make  hard-and-fast  rules ;  still,  there  is 
a  good  deal  of  truth  in  the  saying,  as  we  shall  very  soon 
discover. 

When  first  drawing  hands  we  must  apply  the  same  broad 
rules — of  simplicity.     We  must  choose  simple  positions. 

For  instance,  that  hand  with  finger  pointing,  with  which 
we  are  so  painfully  famihar;  that  ugly,  ill-drawn  hand — 
"  This  way  to  the  Menagerie,"  "  This  way  to  the  Performing 
Bears,"  "  This  way  to  the  Cricket  Pavilion,"  "  This  way  to 
the  best  Teashop  in  the  Town."  "  This  way,"  we  might  add, 
"  to  our  first  drawing  of  a  Hand." 

Having  the  offer  of  our  left  hand,  we  can  begin  without 
delay.  Let  us  sit  squarely  at  a  table,  resting  our  left  elbow 
on  a  book  and  pointing  the  index  finger  straight  in  front 
of  us. 

Observe  the  whole  shape  carefully ;  block  in  the  strong 
square  angles  and  proceed  from  the  beginning  of  the  wrist 
to  the  upper  knuckle — then  along  the  forefinger  to  the  more 
or  less  square  block  of  the  inner  finger,  and  on  to  the  sweeping 
curve  of  the  thumb. 

Now  open  your  hand,  spreading  out  your  fingers.  As  you 
44 


Drawing  Hands 


move  each  finger  up  the  knuckles  loosen  and  dimple  the 
skin  ;  as  you  clench  them  once  more  together  the  knuckles 
curve  into  clean  sharp  forms.  Each  finger  is  based  in  a 
good  strong  knuckle,  remember  that.  Young  artists  are  too 
fond  of  crowding  knuckles  together,  and  if  hands  grew  as 
their  drawings  indicate  they  would  have  a  poor  chance  of 
gripping  an  oar,  a  handle-bar,  or  even  the  useful  knife  and 
fork. 

Having  noted  that  the  biggest  mass  is  composed  of  the 
doubled  fist,  and  that  the  angles  of  thumb  and  forefinger 
bear  away  from  each  other,  we  see  that  the  line  of  the  wrist 
forms  yet  another  angle. 

Of  course  it  is  quite  probable  that  your  hand  may  not 
resemble  mine,  but  the  general  principles  hold  good.  My 
thumb  is  large,  my  fingers  are  long ;  yours  probably  will  be 
shorter  and  the  thumb  more  slender. 

Look  at  the  sweeping  line  as  it  proceeds  from  the  back  of 
the  wrist  to  the  knuckles,  and  notice  the  swelling  curve  of 
the  thumb  beneath  and  the  manner  in  which  it  bends  back. 
We  will  now  give  our  attention  to  the  forefinger.  How 
straight  and  determined  it  is,  pointing  and  almost  speaking 
its  command,  how  thick  it  is  at  the  root,  and  how  it  tapers 
to  the  tip  ! 

We  now  begin  to  search  for  more  details.  We  draw  the 
finger  more  carefully,  marking  the  wrinkles  on  the  upper 
part,  and  the  corresponding  curves  on  the  lower ;  then  we 
notice  the  way  in  which  the  loose  flesh  folds  in  springy  curves, 
joining  thumb  to  forefinger  in  a  useful  hinge. 

We  mark  the  clean  sweep  of  the  thumb  and  the  wrinkles 
on  the  back-curving  knuckle,  also  the  shape  of  the  nail,  a 
square-cut,  important-looking  nail,  curving  on  the  outer  edge 
and  following  the  curve  of  the  thumb-tip.  Then  back  we 
trace  the  thumb  and  note  the  wrinkles  on  the  largest  swell- 
ing curve ;  back  to  the  wrist  we  go  until  we  meet  its  firm 
tendons. 

From  thence  we  might  jump  to  the  knuckles  once  more, 
noting  the  deeply  cleft  wrinkles  in  the  bend.     We  should 

45 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

then  be  ready  to  draw  in  the  dark  shadow  of  the  doubled 
fingers,  the  upper  nail  (like  a  portion  of  a  tiny  pink  shell), 
and  the  square  shadowing  of  the  thumbnail. 

Before  we  leave  the  drawings  of  our  own  left  hand  there 
are  other  poses  to  consider. 

For  instance,  your  own  left  hand  holding  a  small  object 
such  as  a  coin,  a  flower-stem,  or  a  reel  of  cotton.  The  latter, 
being  a  light  object,  you  would  hold  lightly  between  your 
first  fmger  and  your  thumb,  supported  by  the  second  and 
third  fingers. 

Sketch  first  the  upright  shape  of  the  hand  and  wrist,  then 
the  first  finger  and  the  knuckle  from  which  it  springs,  the 
upright  thumb,  and  the  angle  of  the  reel  of  cotton. 

Here,  by  the  by,  let  me  say  once  more  that  you  need  not 
feel  bound  to  pose  your  left  hand  in  exactly  this  position. 
If  you   should   prefer  another   pose,   with  the   palm   more         I 
exposed   (or  less),  by  all  means   adopt  yours  in  preference         1 
to    mine.      These    hints    may    then    be    used    as   a  general        ." 
guide.     My  positions  are  chosen  because  they  present  simple 
problems. 

And  now  let  us  return  to  the  hand  with  the  reel  of  cotton. 

Having  roughly  sketched  the  forefinger,  the  thumb,  and 
the  general  proportions  of  the  wrist  and  hand,  we  should 
then  pay  a  little  more  attention  to  the  hand  itself,  the 
back  of  which  lies  like  a  flat  upright  line  breaking  into 
small  indications  of  the  second  or  third  knuckle.  The  first 
knuckle  is  slightly  indented,  and  the  root  of  the  first  finger 
descends  in  a  firm  swelling  curve  to  the  folded  muscle  of 
the  thumb. 

The  thumb  presses  inward  against  the  reel,  and,  marking 
the  angle  of  its  nail,  we  sketch  the  firm  long  line  of  the  knuckle 
down  the  swelling  curve  to  the  root  of  the  thumb,  behind 
which  we  have  the  lower  swelling  curve  of  the  palm. 

The  first  finger  and  the  shape  of  it  must  be  carefully  noted. 
My  fingers,  though  long,  are  plump,  and  yours  may  present 
sharp  .  bone  and  knuckle.  I  trust  that  they  may,  for  bony 
substances  are  easier  to  draw.  Their  shape  is  clean  and 
46 


Drawing  Hands 


definite,  their  angles  more  acute  and  therefore  more  quickly 
noted. 

We  note  here  the  tip  of  this  first  finger  and  the  apex  coming 
at  the  front  of  the  nail.  Next  we  draw  the  folds  of  each 
finger-joint. 

From  the  second  knuckle  we  can  trace  the  second  finger, 
hidden  behind  the  first  finger,  but  seen  in  a  tiny  space 
between  the  reel  and  first  finger,  and  the  tip  of  it  obtrudes 
on  the  far  side  of  the  reel. 

The  third  finger  rises  from  the  third  knuckle,  and  is  seen 
in  the  space  between  the  first  finger  and  thumb,  and  again 
beyond  the  thumb,  behind  which  we  know  it  supports  the 
reel. 

The  little  finger  merely  waves  a  graceful  tip,  like  the  clown 
in  the  circus,  doing  nothing  in  particular.  This  hand,  though 
simple,  can  be  carried  to  almost  any  length  of  study.  Note 
the  shadows  of  the  thumb,  the  shadows  of  the  knuckles,  of  the 
first  finger-tip,  and  those  cast  by  the  reel.  The  reel  itself, 
being  of  black  silky  thread,  is  (in  my  study)  the  darkest  tone 
of  all. 

The  left  hand  holding  a  fan  suggests  another  variation — 
this  time  with  the  palm  broadside  on,  and  the  finger-tips 
coming  forward. 

First  note  the  pear  shape  of  the  pointed  fingers,  bent 
fingers,  and  flattened  palm,  meeting  at  a  slender  wrist. 

Observe  the  angle  of  the  object  that  is  held  correctly, 
because  from  that  position  the  fingers  curl. 

The  fan  is  a  fairly  stout  object  composed  of  thin  slats  folded 
together,  and  so  nicely  adjusted  that  the  touch  of  the  tip  of 
a  finger  displaces  them. 

The  thumb  holds  and  supports  the  fan  in  a  firm  upright 
position.  The  thumb  rises  from  a  long  swelling  base,  flatly 
on  one  side — despite  the  faint  indication  of  the  bones — and 
in  two  long  swelling  curves  on  the  others,  meeting  in  a  firmly 
rounded  tip. 

Beyond,  and  curled  round  the  fan,  we  have  the  first  fi].;;er  ; 
then  the  second,  third,  and  fourth  fingers  tightly  grasping  the 

47 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

end  of  the  fan.  These  we  block  in  as  one  mass,  marking  the 
angles  of  the  outer  joints,  the  inner  joints,  and  the  finger-tips ; 
the  palm  flattens  and  bulges  to  the  wrist. 

Then  we  again  revert  to  the  thumb  and  the  finer  details, 
the  pointed  finger  and  the  shadows,  the  first,  second,  third, 
and  little  finger  (we  have  ^.Iready  sketched  this  in  mass  and 
therefore  shall  have  no  great  difficulty  with  details),  the 
knuckles  bending  inward,  and  the  tips  of  the  fingers  closely 
holding  the  fan.     Mark  all  the  darkest  shadows.     Under  the 


Fig.  13.   Thumbs  Upright  and  Foreshortened 


first  finger  is  the  curve  of  the  thumb,  and  under  the  fan  (the 
lower  part  of  the  palm  indented  by  the  ring  of  the  fan)  the 
sharp  firm  shadows  between  the  fingers. 

More  poses  for  the  left  hand  might  include  : 

Left  hand  beckoning,  or  palm  extended  and  back  pre- 
sented ;  hand  clenched  ;  hand  lying  flat  on  the  table  palm 
downward,  or  palm  uppermost.  Both  are  rather  difficult 
studies. 

Rest  your  elbow  on  the  table,  clench  your  fingers,  and 
extend  your  thumb.     Draw  only  the  thumb. 

Turn  your  hand  toward  yourself  with  the  palm  uncovered 
and  draw  your  thumb — bent. 

You  should  become  well  acquainted  with  all  your  various 
fingers  by  drawing  each  one  separately — and  many  times. 

Suzanne  Lenglen,  the  great  tennis-player,  said  that  it  took 
her  six  months  to  learn  a  certain  stroke.  It  will  take  us 
48 


Drawing  Hands 


certainly  longer  to  learn  how  to  draw  all  the  fingers  of  our 
left  hand. 

Little  children  are  very  clever  at  painting  and  drawing 
gloves.  Sometimes  I  have  pinned  a  shabby  old  leather  and 
fur  gauntlet  to  a  board,  and  the  painting  has  been  surpris- 
ingly good.  And  yet  had  I  suggested  the  drawing  of  a  hand, 
a  wail  of  despair  would  have  gone  up.  A  glove  is  a  step 
toward  the  drawing  of  a  hand. 

Have  you  drawn  a  hand,  gloved  ? 

If  not,  I  advise  a  trial.  Take  for  choice  a  glove  of  a  firm 
substance,  leather  instead  of  wool,  and  thick  leather  in  prefer- 
ence to  thin ;  if  it  has  a  gauntlet  of  fur,  so  much  the  better. 

Ask  some  kind  friend  to  put  his  gloved  hand  on  the  top  of 
a  stick  or  an  umbrella,  and  make  a  careful  study  of  it.  It 
will  be  simpler  than  the  hand  unclothed.  The  palm  will  be 
more  of  a  mass,  the  seams  will  give  the  direction  of  the  fingers, 
the  wrinkles  of  the  leather  will  give — more  or  less — the  base 
of  the  thumb,  the  knuckles,  and  the  wrist. 

Having  made  a  study  of  the  gloved  hand,  ask  your  friend  to 
remove  his  glove  and  resume  the  position  with  the  bare  hand. 

If  you  can  make  the  two  drawings  on  the  same  sheet  of 
paper  you  will  find  that  your  previous  effort  has  helped  you 
considerably  to  draw  the  ungloved  hand. 

Tight  gloves  distort  and  contract  the  hands,  loose  gloves 
vdisguise  the  shape.  Do  not  let  this  worry  you.  Try  to  draw 
what  you  see — as  you  see  it. 

Another  time  you  might  persuade  some  one  to  hold  up  a 
hand,  palm  toward  you  and  fingers  together.  (See  No.  I, 
Fig.  16.) 

Do  not  begin  with  sprawled  fingers  spreading  apart,  it  is 
bewildering  for  a  start. 

Block  all  the  fingers  together  and  draw  an  imaginary  line 
from  the  tip  of  the  thumb  to  the  fingers  to  check  your  pro- 
portions. Close  up  your  own  thumb  and  note  that  it  reaches 
to  the  first  joint  of  your  forefinger.  Thumbs,  because  of  the 
deceptive  nature  of  a  curve,  are  often  deprived  of  strength, 
length,  and  muscle.  Note  the  large  surfaces  of  muscle,  the 
D  49 


Drawing/or  Beginners 

almost  square  shape  of  the  palm.  Once  you  have  the  larger 
proportions  of  fingers  and  thumbs  well  fixed  in  your  mind  it 
will  not  be  difficult  to  observe  each  finger,  each  knuckle,  each 
finger-tip  separately. 

The  rather  listless  fingers  (No.  II,  Fig.  16)  can  be  indicated 
on  the  same  lines  ;  the  fingers,  though  they  are  separated,  can 

be  first  blocked  in  together. 

When  drawing  a  hand  holding 
a  ball  be  sure  that  the  hand  does 
hold  the  ball.  I  would  emphasize 
the  point  that  often,  very  often, 
young  artists  draw  a  hand  holding 
a  ball,  or  a  pen,  or  a  hockey-stick, 
and  so  absorbed  do  they  become 
in  drawing  the  fingers  that  they 
neglect  the  object  the  fingers  are 
clasping,  with  the  result  that  it 
reappears  in  a  distorted  form. 

And   the   excuse  offered  gene- 
rally is :    "I   had   to  draw  it  in 
such  and  such  a  way  or  the  fingers 
would  not  have  come  right." 
When  drawing  a  hand  grasping 
Fig.  15.  Deaw  the  Object  that  ^n  object  draw  first  the  pen,  or 
IS  HELD  FIRST,  THEN  THE        whatcvcr  thc  objcct  may  be,  and 
Fingers  round  it  n .  .  i      o  t  • .         i  i  • 

fit  the  fingers  round  it,  rubbing  out 

later  the  part  which  is  hidden.  If  the  thing  held  is  straight 
or  round,  obviously  it  must  be  drawn  straight  or  round. 

Have  you  seen  an  X-ray  photograph  of  a  hand,  or  held 
your  fingers  up  to  a  bright  light  and  seen  through  the  film 
of  pink  flesh  the  dim  shape  of  the  bones  ?  Muscles,  tendons, 
veins,  flesh,  and  dimples  attract  our  attention.  The  bones 
we  are  inclined  to  neglect. 

Indeed,  it  is  curious  how  fond  we  are  of  looking  for  things 
that  matter  not  at  all. 

For  instance,  how  often  do  we  see  a  hand  pleasantly  but 
feebly  drawn  !  We  wonder  vaguely  what  can  be  wrong.  Ten 
50 


Drawing  Hands 


chances  to  one  the  artist  has  paid  too  much  attention  to  minor 
things.  He  has  tried  so  hard  to  give  the  nails  the  right  shape  ; 
but  what  attention  has  been  paid  to  the  knuckles,  to  the  base  of 
the  fingers,  and  firm  shapes  between  each  joint,  to  the  joints 
themselves,  all  of  which  are  a  great  deal  more  important  ? 

The  ring  on  the  finger,  the  watch 
on  the  wrist,  is  eagerly  depicted,  for 
it  is  '  jolly  interesting.'  So  it  is. 
But  if  the  metal  is  beautifully  and 
intelligently  drawn,  and  the  finger, 
or  the  wrist,  looks  feeble  and  patchy, 
what  then?  And  the  wrist  is  often 
neglected.  It  is  the  link  between  the 
arm  and  the  hand,  as  the  ankle  is 
the  link  between  the  leg  and  the 
foot,  and  both  shapes  are  fascinating 
studies  for  the  artist. 

We  must  try  to  '  get  at '  the  frame- 
work. Once  we  have  the  bony  struc- 
ture in  our  minds  we  shall  find  the 
outside  shapes  less  baffling. 

Not  that   I   would  advise  you  to 

begin  by  drawing  the  skeleton. 

c^     i  J         •        c       1  Fig.  17.   Bones  of  Hand 

htart  drawmg  freely. 

Only,  when  you  feel  yourself  becoming  confused,  give  a 
thought  to  the  bones  ;  they  are  a  wholesome  check.  Seek 
out  shapes.  Don't  be  satisfied  with  pretty  curves  and 
dimples,  cushioned  palms  and  tallow-candle  fingers.  Move 
the  fingers  to  and  fro.  Twist  and  turn  the  wrist.  Never  be 
afraid  of  losing  a  position.  You  will  gain  something  of  far 
more  value  than  that  which  you  may  lose. 

The  bones  of  the  hand  are  small  but  fairly  easy  to  under- 
stand. They  have  no  cup  and  ball  or  rotary  movements  like 
those  of  shoulder  and  forearm  ;  neither  are  they  shrouded  in 
huge  muscles  like  those  of  the  ribs  and  back.  Moreover, 
they  are  plainly  seen  in  the  hands  of  the  very  old,  criss- 
crossed with  big  blue  veins. 

51 


CHAPTER  V 

Drawing  Feet 

IF  we  all  walked  about  in  sandals  instead  of  boots  and 
shoes,  the  human  foot  would  be  much  less  difficult  to 
draw. 

If  centuries  of  cramping  leather,  of  high  heels  and  pointed 
toes,  had  not  spoilt  the  shape  of  modern  feet,  we  should  be 
more  interested  in  drawing  the  '  human  foot  divine.' 

Artists  often  declare  that  a  pretty  foot  is  the  rarest  of  all 
rare  things. 

But  all  start  in  life  fairly  well  equipped  in  that  respect, 
and  therefore  we  may  consider  ourselves  fortunate  if  we 
have  the  opportunity  of  drawing  Jack's  bare  foot  or  Baby's 
queer  little  curling  toes. 

And  this  presents  an  idea.  Feet — that  is,  bare  feet — often 
being  impossible  to  ^procure  as  models,  why  should  we  not 
begin  by  drawing  shoes  and  boots  ? 

Baby's  '  bootikin,'  absurd  little  shape  though  it  is,  gives 
a  rough  idea  of  the  foot,  as  Baby's  small  fingerless  glove 
presents  a  rough  impression  of  the  shape  of  a  hand. 

There  is  plenty  to  observe  in  a  shoe  or  a  boot,  and  it  is 
rather  a  fascinating  study  if  we  choose  one  with  a  highly 
polished  surface.  Then,  again,  a  bedroom-slipper  of  quilted 
satin  and  fur  is  a  joy  to  paint. 

Examine  the  bootikin.  Do  we  not  get  a  crude  shape  of  a 
foot  ?  Stuff  it  with  paper  and  perch  it  on  a  table  before  you. 
Make  a  sketch  of  it,  and  then  sketch  Baby's  foot  in  the  same 
position,  and  on  the  same  broad  outline  as  the  bootikin, 
treating  it  first  as  two  simple  angles — the  sloping  angle  of 
the  leg,  and  the  forward  thrust  of  the  small  plump  foot.  The 
baby's  ankle  is  so  cushioned  with  fat  that  it  is  difficult  to 
53 


Drawing  Feet 


discover  the  bone,  but  that  we  must  try  to  find,  because 
from  the  ankle-bone  we  get  the  triangular  shape  of  the  heel 
and  the  flat  tread  of  the  sole.     The  fold  of  fat  above  the  ankle 


marks  the  deepest  part  of  the  foot  and  the  highest  line  of  the 
instep.  This  line  descends  steeply  to  the  root  of  the  toes, 
and  expands  in  the  bold  curves  of  the  five  toes. 

Now  borrow  your  mother's  shoe.  Place  that  before  you 
and  on  a  level  with  your  eye.  (If  you  begin  by  trying  to 
draw  the  shoe  very  much  beneath  you,  or,  for  the  matter  of 

53 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

that,  very  much  above  you,  you  will  have  a  more  compli- 
cated problem.) 

Try  first  to  draw  it  in  a  simple  position — a  side  view. 

At  fi.rst  sight  one  is  apt  to  think  a  high-heeled  shoe  a  rather 
complicated  shape,  but  if  you  try  to  analyse  it  as  a  rough 
block,  it  is  no  more  nor  less  than  a  wedge.  The  high  heel 
gives  the  greatest  depth,  the  toe  gives  the  narrowing  point, 
the  tread  of  the  foot — heel  and  sole  of  the  shoe — a  flat  line. 
Having  marked  this  simple  triangular  shape  we  note  the 
large  oval  opening,  the  stumpy  and  rounded  toe,  the  beautiful 
'  slick  '  curve  of  the  heel.  Of  course  we  know  that  no  part 
of  the  foot  enters  the  high  heel,  which  is  merely  compressed 
leather  or  wood  ;  and  we  should,  therefore,  trace  the  foot 
within  the  shoe,  in  our  thoughts  if  not  with  our  pencil. 

Then  perhaps  we  shall  catch  Jack  in  a  specially  charitable 
frame  of  mind,  ready  to  sit  bare-footed. 

Quick  !  let  us  get  pencil  and  paper,  and  plant  Jack  on  a 
stool  with  his  foot  resting  on  the  floor,  and  to  give  more 
action — and  consequently  more  interest — to  our  study  we 
will  raise  his  heel  by  propping  it  up  on  a  fairly  thick  book. 

Next  we  sit  down  on  a  low  seat  or  cushion  on  the  floor, 
as  near  as  possible  to  the  level  of  Jack's  foot. 

Again  we  are  all  for  simplicity.  A  profile  of  Jack's  foot, 
presenting  an  angle  with  the  ankle  and  leg,  would  be  an 
interesting  study. 

Having  roughly  drawn  the  triangular  shape  of  the  bending 
foot,  we  next  proceed  to  note  important  facts.  The  mass  of 
the  heel,  the  shape  of  the  ankle,  the  broad  fine  sweeping  line 
of  the  instep  (Jack  has  a  particularly  well-shaped  instep), 
and  the  ball  of  the  foot — the  springy  cushion  upon  which  the 
tread  of  the  foot  presses. 

Afterward  observe  the  masses  of  light  and  shade,  and  see 
how  the  light  picks  out  the  strong  tendons  about  the  ankle. 
I  find  it  helpful  to  shade  as  if  I  were  chiselling  out  shapes 
— a  method  that  may  not  appeal  to  you.  So  long  as  you 
shade  intelligently,  not  beginning  a  shadow  and  leaving  it 
off  without  reason,  but  using  the  shadow  to  emphasize  a 
54 


,/ 


f-— ^"If^^*^ 


Fig.  19.   Jack's  Foot 


54 


Drawing  Feet 


shape,  a  swelling,  a  curve,  a  bone,  or  a  tendon,  that  is  all 
I  ask. 

Another  time  we  might  try  a  '  full-face  '  or  three-quarter 
view  of  a  foot.  And  as  this  presents  us  with  the  problem  of 
foreshortening,  let  me  advise  you  to  begin  by  drawing  the 
foot  in  shoe  and  stocking ;  afterward  draw  the  foot  in  the 
same  position  without  the  shoe  and  stocking,  for  the  very 
same  reason  that  we  first  drew  the  hand  gloved,  and  later 
ungloved.  The  covering  simplifies  matters.  Instead  of  the 
angle  of  the  toes  and  toe-nails  we  have  the  broad  sweep  of 
leather  covering  it  all  in  a  three-cornered  form. 

You  may  prefer  to  draw  the  foot  with  the  heel  on  the 
ground.  I  have  chosen  to  represent  the  heel  lifted.  For 
one  reason  it  gives  action  and  life  to  the  position,  and  for 
another  presents  a  more  acute  and  more  interesting  angle. 

We  have  the  leg  representing  one  angle,  and  the  foot  yet 
another  angle,  and  the  apex  of  this  angle  lies  in  the  ankle, 
which  we  know  to  be  the  end  of  two  bones.  The  ankles  are 
the  ends  of  the  leg-bones,  the  wrists  are  the  ends  of  the 
arm-bones. 

When  we  are  very  small  we  usually  draw  the  feet  as  two 
little  spoon-shaped  objects,  something  like  a  couple  of  feeble 
golf-clubs,  which  is  not  so  very  wrong  in  effect. 

Therefore,  when  we  draw  a  foot,  no  matter  what  the 
position  may  be,  the  two  simple  angles  of  foot  and  leg  are 
most  important.  Once  they  are  settled  we  can  devote  our- 
selves to  noting  the  tread  of  the  foot  and  the  heel,  the  curve 
under  the  foot,  and  the  curve  of  the  toes. 

Margery  has  not  a  very  big  ankle  ;  the  outside  bone  is 
higher  and  clearly  defined  ;  the  inner  one  is  barely  seen. 
Partly  by  observing  the  folds  of  the  stocking,  and  partly 
by  deduction  (for  we  know  the  ankle-bones  are  opposite  each 
other),  and  also  because  of  a  shallow  depression,  we  mark  the 
position  of  the  bones.  That,  you  see,  is  a  valuable  fact. 
Ankle-bones  settled,  we  next  mark  the  curve  of  the  heel, 
which  is  slightly  exaggerated  by  the  thickness  of  leather  ; 
then  we  note  the  curve  of  the  foot  as  it  treads  on  the  ground, 

55 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

and  compare  the  two  sides  of  the  foot,  one  a  long  sweeping 
line,  the  other  shorter  (shorter  because  of  the  fullness  of 
the  rising  instep),  meeting  at  the  toe  with  an  abrupt  and 
slightly  indenting  curve. 

The  sharp  shadow  under  the  toe  lifts  the  foot  from  the 
ground,  and  a  shadow  defines  the  top  of  the  instep.  The 
curve  of  the  strap  of  the  shoe  provides  another  shadow,  and 
also  emphasizes  the  depth  of  the  foot  from  instep  to  arch. 
Margery's  stocking,  being  of  lighter  material  than  the  shoe, 
adds  to  the  variety  of  the  surface  of  our  drawing.  As  the 
folds  in  a  stocking  indicate  the  position  of  the  ankle,  so  will 
the  bend  of  the  leather  in  a  boot  or  shoe  mark  the  tread  of 
the  foot  and  the  bending  joints  of  the  toes. 

A  highly  polished  leather  is  easier  to  draw  than  a  soft  dull 
glace  or  suede,  for  it  accentuates  light  and  shade.  The  bright 
light  on  the  toe,  the  half-moon  of  light  on  the  side  of  the 
foot,  the  dull  disc  of  light  that  indicates  the  ankle,  are  of 
great  value  ;  they  show  the  position  of  the  bones.  Keep 
these  bright ;   do  not  dim  their  surfaces. 

Having  now  drawn  Margery's  foot  in  shoe  and  stocking, 
perhaps  we  shall  persuade  Margery  to  pose  in  the  same 
position  without  her  shoes  and  stockings,  as  if  she  were  on 
her  way  to  paddle  in  the  sea. 

Now  you  see  the  bones  more  easily,  and  having  marked 
the  two  large  and  simple  angles  of  leg  and  foot,  as  in  the 
previous  drawing,  we  continue  with  the  rest  of  the  foot.  The 
heel  looks  a  trifle  smaller ;  the  toes,  being  unhampered  with 
leather,  spread,  and  the  big  toe  asserts  itself.  Block  first  the 
toes  as  a  large  shape,  noting  their  tips  and  roots,  and  working 
from  the  tendons  (seen  between  the  ankles)  and  the  arching 
muscles  of  the  upper  part  of  the  instep,  and  then  divide  and 
sketch  the  toes  and  their  various  angles. 

The  drawing  of  the  foot  clothed  has,  I  am  sure,  helped  you 
with  the  drawing  of  the  naked  foot. 

The  sandal  worn  by  the  Romans,  with  its  half-covering  of 
the  toes,  and  its  straps  and  ribbons  across  the  instep,  and 
its  thick  sole — and  one  can  roughly  contrive  a  sandal  with 
56 


Fig.  20.    Margery's  Foot 


56 


Drawing  Feet 


the  monkeys,  the   tree- 
as  we  use  our  thumbs, 


cardboard  and  ribbons  at  home — makes  a  most  interesting 
subject  to  draw. 

Sandals,  by  the  interweaving  of  their  straps,  draw  our 
attention  to  the  variety  of  shapes  of  the  toes,  which  we  too 
often  overlook.  The  big  toe  is  an  important  member  of  the 
foot ;  indeed,  of  the  whole  body.  When  the  foot  is  raised 
it  is  the  big  toe  that  spreads  and  separates  from  the  other 
toes,  and  helps  to  balance  the  foot.  The  big  toe  is  as  char- 
acteristic as  the  thumb.  (Indeed, 
climbing  animals,  use  the  big  toe 
to  grasp  and  hold  the 
branches.)  It  is  usually 
square-tipped,  thick,  and 
muscular.  The  next  toe 
is  slender  and  long,  the 
second  and  third  toes 
graduate,  and  the  little 
toe  is  curved  or  doubled 
up,  and  is  almost  more 
negligible  in  size  and 
appearance  than  the 
little  finger. 

It  is  interesting  to  learn  that  by  the  use  of  the  feet  and 
the  manipulation  of  the  toes,  artists,  or,  at  all  events,  crafts- 
men, have  been  helped  in  their  work.  A  famous  craftsman 
of  Cairo,  who  works  in  wood  and  produces  beautiful  lattices 
for  windows  and  doorways,  uses  his  left  foot  as  a  third  hand  ; 
because  of  his  skill  in  the  use  of  this  foot  he  is  known  to  the 
city  as  '  the  three-handed  man.' 

When  the  foot  is  seen  from  the  back  the  heel  is  naturally 
the  most  prominent  feature.  Also  the  ankles  are  more  easily 
observed. 

Having  marked  the  angles  of  the  leg  and  foot,  we  should 
next  notice  the  straight  tendon  that  runs  down  between  the 
ankles  and  spreads  into  the  firm  swelling  apex  of  the  heel. 
On  either  side  of  the  foot  the  ankles  are  clearly  seen.  Note 
the  shapes  well,  and  note  also  the  height  of  the  upper  part 

57 


Fig.  21.  The  Sandalled  Foot 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

of  the  foot  (this  is  always  the  widest  section),  and  its  sharp 
descent  to  the  toes.  Seen  from  the  rear  these  toes  present 
a  bhmted  and  rather  flattened  curve.  Trace  the  flat  under- 
surface  of  the  foot,  the  tread  and  balance  first,  afterward  the 
curves  of  the  heel,  and  the  space  between  the  instep  and  the 
ground,  remembering,  always,  the  foot  within  the  shoe. 

The  sole  of  the  foot  is  a  flattened  surface  on  the  outside 
edge.  This  you  can  see  for  yourself  in  the  two  sketches 
which  show  both  the  inside  and  the  outside  of  the  foot. 
Moreover,  if  you  take  off  your  shoe,  you  can  pass  your  finger 
under  the  inner  side  of  the  foot,  but  on  the  outer  edge  there 
is  no  space  at  all. 

Walking,  kicking,  dancing,  stamping,  swimming — here  we 
have  an  immense  variety  of  poses.  Dancing,  the  foot  rises  at 
a  steep  angle,  the  heel  clear  of  the  ground,  the  ball  of  the  foot 
and  the  toes  resting  lightly.  (I  do  not  refer  to  ballet-dancing, 
which  is  more  or  less  of  a  gymnastic  feat ;  the  shoes  are  heavily 
padded  at  the  toes,  and  on  these  pads  the  ballet-girl  rests.) 

Stamping,  the  foot  comes  down  with  an  all-over  flat  action, 
heel  and  toe  held  level.  Kicking,  the  foot  thrusts  out,  toes 
upraised.  The  kicking  position  shows  us  the  sole  of  the  foot, 
and  the  sole  is  a  curious  shape — one  that  we  should  not 
neglect.  Should  we  draw  one  of  our  brothers  sitting  by  the 
fire  leaning  back  in  a  chair,  it  is  highly  probable  that  he  will 
cross  his  legs  and  put  up  his  feet  to  warm.  Shorn  of  heel  and 
thick  leather  soles,  the  sole  of  a  foot  is  a  flat  elongated  shape. 
The  human  foot  has  the  padded  soft  flesh  beneath  the  tread, 
with  wrinkles  on  the  inner  side,  and  a  small  firm  smooth  heel, 
something  like  the  outline  of  an  elongated  pear. 

The  shape  of  the  modern  shoe  worn  by  the  small  child  gives 
us,  as  it  claims  to  do,  the  natural  shape  of  the  sole. 

Turn  it  over  and  observe  it  well. 

The  general  shape  of  the  five  toes  resembles  the  general 
shape  of  the  four  fingers.  When  you  doff  your  shoe  and 
stocking  look  at  your  toes.  Then  put  up  your  hand  and 
observe  the  back  and  tips  of  the  fingers.  Fan-shaped — are 
they  not  ?  So  are  your  toes. 
58 


Fig.  22.    Back  and  Side  View  of  Feet 


58 


Drawing  Feet 


There  is  as  much  character  in  the  foot  as  in  the  hand.  The 
tall,  slim,  long-limbed  person  has  invariably  a  long  slim  hand, 
and  a  slim  and  narrow  foot.  The  plump  short  girl  or  boy- 
has  the  plump  hand  and  foot.  The  long-fingered  hand  usually 
goes  with  the  long  thin  toes. 

Fashion  inflicts  queer  shapes  on  the  foot.  At  one  time  it 
insists  that  all  our  shoes  shall  be  narrow  and  peaked,  another 
time  squat  and  round-toed  ;  then  heels  must  be  worn  like 
stilts,  or  shaved  down  to  the  thinnest  substance. 

In  China  we  all  know  what  a  fetish  was  once  made  of  the 


Fig.  23.  The  Inside  and  Outside  of  a  Foot 

tiny  foot.  When  swaddled  and  compressed,  the  poor  little 
foot  has  no  chance  at  all.  And  there  was  a  time  in  English 
history  when  the  toes  of  the  shoes  were  so  long  that  they  had 
to  be  buckled  back  to  the  knees. 

All  of  which  indicates  the  absolute  necessity  of  knowing  the 
shape  of  the  foot.  Fashion  may  deceive  the  many,  but  the 
artist  must  know  that  it  only  tries  to  disguise  the  true  form. 

If  we  want  to  see  the  foot  unspoiled  then  we  must  go  to 
the  countries  where  fashion  and  manners  have  not  affected 
it,  where  generation  after  generation  has  walked  the  earth  on 
the  bare  foot,  or  with  only  the  slight  protection  of  a  sandalled 
sole.  Then  we  see  how  finely  it  supports  the  body,  what  a 
thing  of  strength  and  beauty  it  can  be  ! — firm  heel,  arched 
instep,  springing  muscles  of  the  sole  imprinting  the  ground 
with  its  firm  tread  I 


59 


CHAPTER  VI 

Drawing  Head^  Face^  Features^ 
and  Hair 

I  REMEMBER,  years  ago,  poring  over  an  old-fashioned 
drawing-book  which  contained — among  many  other  things 
— diagrams  that  reduced  head,  face,  and  features  to  the 
very  simplest  of  problems. 

The  author  began  by  comparing  the  head  to  an  oval  or 
egg-shaped  substance. 

Full  face  presented  a  simple  oval. 

Sideways  (or  profile)  presented  a  deeper  oval,  with  the 
forepart  flatter  than  the  back,  which  thickened  a  little  at 
the  base. 

On  this  egg-shaped  form  were  traced  curving  lines,  follow- 
ing, of  course,  the  curves  of  the  surface,  one  central  line,  and 
three  transverse  lines.  The  central  line  marked  the  centre 
of  the  brow,  the  angle  and  tip  of  the  nose,  and  ran  through 
the  upper  and  lower  lips  to  the  point  of  the  chin. 

The  cross,  or  transverse,  lines  marked  the  angle  of  the 
brow  above  the  eyes,  then  the  angle  of  the  nostrils,  and  lastly 
the  angle  of  the  mouth. 

When  the  head  tilted  and  sank  forward  the  lines  of  the  face 
curved  downward. 

When  the  head  was  thrown  up  and  backward  the  lines  of 
the  features  curved  in  a  like  manner. 

Seen  in  profile  (or  sideways)  the  line  of  the  brow,  carried  to 
the  back  of  the  head  with  the  line  of  the  nostril,  gave  the 
position  of  the  ear. 

This  is  a  valuable  little  key  to  the  quick  placing  of  the 
features.  In  a  word,  it  helps  with  the  perspective  of  features. 
60 


Head^  Face^  Features^  Hair 

The  unpractised  artist  is  very  prone  to  devote  too  much 
space  to  the  face  and  too  little  to  the  head. 


Fig.  24.  The  Head  and  Face 

We  all  know  that  babies  have  abnormally  large  heads  • 
that   children's   heads   are   large  in   comparison   with   their 

61 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

bodies  ;   that  only  the  adult's  head  and  body  balance  in  nice 

proportion — that  is,  the  head  is  neither  too  large  nor  too 

small  for  the  body. 

But  the  face  never  occupies  the  entire  space  of  the  head,  as 

young  artists  often  seem  to  imagine  that  it  does. 

Look  at  the  size  of  the  crown  of  the  head,  at  the  back  and 

the  sides  thereof,  and  do  not  spread  the  forehead  right  up  to 

the  crest  of  the  head. 

Note  also  the  beautiful  balance  of  the  head  on  the  neck, 

the  neck  on  the  shoulders. 

The  indenting  curve  at  the  base  of  the  skull  is  not  level 

with    the    jaw — but   see  ! — it    is   a    little 

below  the  level  of  the  ear  and  on  a  line 

with  the  nostril. 

The  neck  is  full  of  interesting  drawing. 

There  is  the  full  curve  of  the  throat, 

and  the  shorter  and  stronger 

l3  ^  S  <2  ^   curve  from  the  base  of  the  back 

^  ^  of  the  skull  to  the  nape  of  the 

neck  and  the  spine.    The  large 

bones  of  the  vertebrae,  which 
Fig.  25.  The  Head  and  Neck  ^g   ^^^   fg^j   ^j^j^   ^j^^   t^p^   ^f 

our  fingers,  resemble,  as  the  French  word  chainon  has  it,  the 
links  of  a  chain. 

Two  large  muscles  (mastoid)  often  attract  our  attention 
when  the  head  is  twisted  aside.  Extending  from  behind  the 
ear  to  the  forepart  of  the  collar-bone,  they  are  always  more 
strongly  developed  in  a  boy  than  in  a  girl,  and  in  a  man  than 
in  a  woman.  These  you  can  feel  at  the  root  of  the  neck  and 
the  forepart  of  the  throat  by  twisting  your  head  right  and 
left ;  and  they  form  a  cup-like  depression  when  your  head  is 
straight. 

The  neck,  you  will  notice,  is  so  strengthened  with  muscle 
and  bone  that  it  rises  like  a  small  pillar  from  a  very  solid 
base. 

A  girl's  neck  is  slender,  a  boy's  equally  thin,  but  more 
muscular.  A  woman's  neck  is  full  of  entrancing  curves  ;  a 
62 


Head^  Face^  Features^  Hair 

man's  neck  very  strong,  very  muscular,  and  consequently 
rather  thick. 

As  with  all  other  parts  of  the  human  body,  necks  exist  in 
every  variety — short  necks,  long  necks,  thick,  thin,  muscular, 
strong,  feeble,  and  fat ;  but,  and  the  fact  is  worth  noting,  the 
base  of  the  neck  where  it  joins  the  body  is  always  its  thickest 
part. 

With  this  slight  introduction  to  the  general  proportion  and 
shape  of  the  head,  we  can  next  turn  our  attention  to  the  face 
and  the  features. 

One  hears  many  curious  remarks  from  young  artists  ;  for 
instance  :  "I  simply  love  drawing  people,  but  I  can  never 
draw  a  face."  This  is  by  no  means  an  uncommon  experience. 
Another  equally  frank  statement  is  often  heard  :  "  Faces  ! 
'Rather  !  They  are  simply  topping  !  But  /  can't  draw  hands 
and  things  !  " 

And  there  we  are  ! 

A  curious  world  it  would  be  if  ygung  artists  were  confronted 
with  embodiments  of  their  own  drawings  !  Imagine  the  shock 
of  meeting  a  gentleman  in  plus  fours  with  no  face  but  a  turnip- 
like smudge,  or  a  lovely  languishing  lady  with  exquisite 
shingled  head  and  nothing  more  substantial  than  a  few  slight 
lines  indicating  a  body — and  those  quite  wrong  ! 

Believe  me,  it  does  not  do  to  run  away  with  such  ideas. 
We  may  say  things  so  often  that  in  time  they  seem  to  weave 
a  spell. 

A  young  and  most  promising  artist-friend  of  mine  drew 
faces  admirably,  and  refused  to  draw  anything  else.  She 
would  not  draw  a  hand  or  a  foot.  And  in  time  it  really 
seemed  as  if  she  could  not — which  of  course  was  absurd. 
Anyhow,  to  this  day  she  draws  exquisite  faces,  and  the  rest 
of  her  drawings  would  shame  the  veriest  beginner.  She  is 
an  artist — spoilt. 

If  we  take  our  subjects  one  by  one,  and  make  our  progress 
step  by  step,  we  may  be  slow,  but  in  due  time  we  shall '  arrive.' 

And  as  an  excellent  aid  to  our  own  home  studies  let  us 
provide  ourselves  with  a  hand-glass  or  small  mirror.     This 

63 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

is  an  invaluable  help,  indeed,  a  necessity,  for  the  studying 
and  drawing  of  our  own  features. 

And  at  the  outset  I  would  utter  a  word  of  warning  about 
the  drawing  of  a  face. 

It  is  surprising  that  young  artists  often  draw  the  eyes  and 
mouth  as  if  they  were  mere  patterns  stuck  on  the  face,  a 
method  that  is  evidently  copied  from  fashion  and  poster 
artists,  who  are  very  fond  of  this  effective  but  mask-like  effect. 
The  eyes  in  their  pictures  are  heavily  outlined,  the  lips  are 
thickly  painted  with  purple  crimson  tints.  It  is  a  wrong 
point  of  view,  and  a  very  harmful  one,  as  you  will  soon 
discover. 

Look  at  the  eye,  your  eye,  anyone's  eye.  What  a  lumi- 
nous, expressive  feature  it  is,  composed  of  most  subtle  and 
exquisite  parts ! 

Look  at  the  iris,  the  ring  of  colour,  the  velvety  depths  of 
the  pupil,  the  shining  white  surface  of  the  '  sclerotic  tissue  ' 
surrounding  the  eyeball,  and  the  soft  pink  inner  corners. 
Remember  the  ball  of  the  eye  is  a  large  object  covered  by 
lids  which  reveal  only  part  of  the  whole.  Look  at  the  curve 
of  the  lid  and  its  graceful  fringe. 

But  lashes,  though  dark  and  sweeping,  are  not  as  important 
as  pupil  and  lid.  Do  not  draw  the  lower  lid  in  a  thick  hard 
outline.  You  will  produce  at  once  a  mask,  not  a  face.  If, 
for  theatrical  purposes,  you  rub  a  stick  of  darkening  stuff 
beneath  your  eyes,  you  then  see  your  eye  forced  into  a  slit- 
like shape,  but  only  then.  The  eye  is  the  most  expressive 
feature.  Laugh,  and  your  eye  must  laugh.  I  have  seen 
people  smile  with  their  lips  when  the  eyes  were  not  smiling, 
and  what  a  futile  smile  it  was  ! 

To  picture  the  lips  as  two  thick  slabs  of  colour  is  just  as 
great  a  crime. 

Your  mouth  may  be  full  and  dimpled,  it  may  be  small  and 
thin,  it  may  be  wide  and  of  no  very  definite  shape.  But  it 
is  not,  it  can  never  be,  a  moulded  pattern  stuck  like  a  postage- 
stamp  on  your  face. 

Draw  down  your  mouth,  pout,  smile,  laugh — and  note  the 
64 


Head^  Face^  Features^  Hair 

teeth  revealed.  "  Roses  filled  with  snow,"  sang  the  Eliza- 
bethan poet  of  his  lady's  pretty  lips. 

Let  us  take  up  the  hand-glass  in  our  left  hand  and  a  pencil 
in  our  right,  and  examine  our  features. 

An  eye  is  an  oblong  shape  set  in  an  oval  cavity.  We  see 
it  in  primitive  drawings  as  a  round  black  dot  to  which  is 
added  a  pointed  lozenge-shaped  frame. 

The  iris,  being  the  coloured  part  of  the  eye,  will  probably 
first  attract  our  attention.  That,  we  notice,  is  a  circular 
shape,  covered  above  and  below  by  the  upper  lid  and  the 
lower  lid.  Draw  the  circular  shape  boldly.  We  will  assume 
that  the  upper  lid  is  firmly  and  clearly  seen,  not  hidden 
by  the  brow.  Having  observed  it  closely  and  recorded  our 
impressions  we  pass  to  the  lower  lid,  which  should  be 
drawn  lightly,  for  it  is  a  tender  delicate  form. 

Next  we  examine  the  inner  corner  of  the  eye  (nearest  the 
nose),  where  are  the  soft  pink  tear-ducts,  which  we  touch  in 
lightly  with  the  pencil. 

The  outer  corner  of  the  eye  forms  a  sharper  angle,  with 
the  upper  lid  curving  downward  to  meet  the  flesh  of  the 
lower  lid  and  its  corresponding  upward  curve. 

Having  sketched  the  shape  of  the  eye  as  a  whole,  we  might 
next  return  for  a  closer  observation  of  the  iris. 

Is  there  anything  in  nature  more  lovely  than  the  iris  of 
the  human  eye  ?  The  liquid  tint  of  blue,  grey,  or  brown  is 
like  the  luminous  colouring  of  a  strange  flower.  And  it  is 
colour.  Therefore,  it  is  a  shade  deeper,  many  shades  deeper, 
than  the  opaque  whiteness  of  the  eyeball.  Then  shade  it 
with  your  pencil. 

Within  the  iris  we  have  yet  another  shape,  the  little  black 
pupil  of  the  eye  through  which  the  light  passes.  This  is  of 
velvety  richness,  but  before  shading  carefully  note  the  shape 
of  the  bright  light  on  the  pupil,  and  '  leave  '  this  light,  working 
the  shadow  round  it. 

Suppose  we  ignore  this  light,  and  shade  it  in  with  the 
pupil ;  at  once  the  eye  looks  lifeless. 

Having  done  all  this,  we  might  add  a  few  of  the  long  lashes 
E  65 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

— not  all.  We  should  no  more  draw  every  leaf  on  a  tree 
than  draw  every  lash  of  the  eye.  We  choose  the  most 
important. 

Finally,  we  take  a  general  survey,  deepen  shadows,  add  a 
few  details,  and  then  notice  that  the  eyebrows  have  been 
neglected. 

We  should  compare  the  eyebrows  with  the  shape  of  the  eye. 

The  hairs  of  the  eyebrow  are  usually  thicker  at  the  base 
— that  is,  nearest  the  nose — than  at  the  outer  edge.  They 
begin  full  and  thick  and  incline  from  the  nose  outward, 
framing  the  eye  in  a  wide  curve. 

Eyebrows  there  are  of  every  variety.  You  may  see  every 
day  eyebrows  thick,  thin,  bushy,  soft,  fine,  and  coarse ; 
eyebrows  dark,  and  eyebrows  so  fair  that  they  can  hardly 
be  detected  except  in  a  very  bright  light ;  eyebrows  traced 
as  delicately  as  if  they  were  made  of  a  single  hair,  and  shaggy, 
overhanging  eyebrows  from  under  which  the  eyes  gleam  like 
little  pools.     Note  the  eyebrows  and  draw  them  carefully. 

It  would  seem  foolish,  having  made  a  close  study  of  one 
eye,  not  to  draw  both  eyes  with  equal  care. 

We  might  this  time  choose  to  draw  our  eyes  from  another 
angle.  And  as  we  are  drawing  a  pair  of  eyes,  we  have  twice 
as  much  to  bear  in  mind.  First,  we  should  roughly  trace 
the  position  of  the  two  eyes.  Sketch  the  position  of  the  brow, 
and  the  angle  of  the  two  eyes,  and  the  size  of  the  eye  and 
eyelids. 

It  is  useful  to  remember  as  a  general  rule  that  the  space 
between  two  eyes  is  the  length  of  an  eye.  Then,  having 
sketched  the  position,  general  angle,  shape  of  eye  and  eye- 
socket,  it  would  be  wise  to  note  the  position  of  the  iris  and 
pupil. 

These  we  know  must  agree.  Unless  we  are  very  careful 
to  sketch  the  iris  of  both  eyes  looking  in  the  same  direction, 
we  shall  certainly  give  our  drawing  a  most  horrible  squint. 

If  the  iris  lies  in  the  outer  corner  of  the  near  eye,  it  must 
lie  in  the  inner  corner  of  the  far  eye.  (If  you  wish  to  sketch 
a  cross-eyed  person,  then  you  place  both  irises  near  the  nose.) 
66 


Head^  Face^  Features^  Hair 

Lightly  trace  the  iris  and  the  pupil,  and  the  shape  and  posi- 
tion of  the  light  on  the  pupil. 

Next  we  note  the  shape  of  the  upper  lid  of  the  near  eye 
(and  its  long  curve),  the  deepest  and  the  narrowest  part ; 
the  shape  of  the  inner  and  blunt  end  of  the  eye,  the  sharper 
curved  angle  of  the  outer  part  of  the  eye.  We  look  at  the 
far  eye,  and  this  curves  slightly  away  from  us  on  the  curve 
of  the  cheek.  The  eyeball  nears  the  blunt  end,  and  exposes 
a  large  space  of  white. 

Lid,  pupil,  iris,  eyelash,  eyebrow,  all  follow  in  their  turn  ; 
add  such  shadows  as  you  wish,  and  you  must  certainly  not 
forget  the  shadow  of  the  nose  and  the  forehead.  The  eye 
lies  in  a  socket.  In  old  people  this  is  very  noticeable.  The 
shadow  of  the  brow  falls  on  the  socket  and  gives  a  very  sharp 
and  bold  outline  for  drawing. 

Drawing  eyes  from  the  mirror  has  certain  limitations,  so 
let  us  ask  some  one  to  '  sit '  for  us  with  an  eye  in  profile. 

Bear  in  mind  an  important  point.  The  eyeball  is  covered 
by  the  lid.  Then  obviously  the  lid  must  project  beyond  the 
eyeball.  Young  artists  often  draw  the  eyelid  and  the  eyeball 
as  if  they  are  exactly  on  the  same  level.  But  anything  that 
covers  must  be  larger  than  the  object  covered. 

You  would  not,  for  instance,  draw  a  tea-cosy  smaller,  or 
even  the  same  size  as  a  teapot,  for  you  know  very  well  it 
would  not  cover  the  pot.  You  would  not  draw  a  hat  exactly 
the  same  size  as  the  bare  skull.  It  must  be  larger.  Then 
why  draw  an  eyelid  (^hat  covers  the  eyeball)  the  same  size  as 
the  eye  ? 

Also  you  must  allow  for  the  thickness  of  the  lid.  If  you 
turn  your  head  upward,  and  look  down  at  your  reflection  in 
the  glass,  the  thickness  of  the  lid  will  be  very  apparent.  You 
will  notice  the  inner  edge  resting  against  the  eyeball,  and  the 
outer  edge  fringed  with  the  lashes.  This  can  be  seen  even 
more  plainly  if  you  open  your  eyes  wide,  as  if  in  astonishment 
or  surprise. 

The  open  lid  is  not  so  frequently  seen  as  the  small  lid  and 
sunken  eye,  which  fact  worries  the  unpractised  artist  not  a 

67 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

little.     The  eyelid  of  course  is  there,  but  the  brow  swells 
forward  and  conceals  part  of  the  lid. 

When  you  draw  eyes  of  this  description  sketch  the  ball  of 
the  eye,  and  the  lid,  and  then  sketch  the  brow. 

Eyes,  of  course,  there  are  in  infinite  variety.  Some  are 
heavily  lidded,  some  are  large  and  round,  some  are  lashed 
with  long  silken  hair.  There  are  the  small  '  piggy  '  or  half- 
closed  eyes,  the  eyes  that  pierce  with  sharp  keen  glances. 
There  are  the  dreamy  eyes,  the  laughing,  twinkling  eyes,  and 
the  sharp,  suspicious  eyes. 

There  is  nothing  easy  about  the  drawing  of  an  eye.  It 
will  always  demand  the  closest  care  and  attention. 

Even  when  we  are  drawing  the  eye  of  a  sleeping  person, 
when  the  lids  cover  the  eyeball,  there  is  the  exquisite  meet- 
ing of  the  lids,  the  mingling  of  the  lashes,  and  the  shadows 
cast  by  the  lashes  on  the  cheek.  We  must  not  forget,  by 
the  way,  to  indicate  the  roundness  of  the  eyeball  beneath 
the  lids. 

A  nose  presents  more  difficulties  to  the  young  student  than 
any  other  feature  ;  more  especially  the  drawing  of  a  nose 
in  full  view — when  we  see  as  much  of  the  left  nostril  as  the 
right.  And  the  reason  of  this  difficulty  is  one  of  perspective. 
We  are  confronted  with  something  which  fills  our  mind  with 
perplexity,  something  of  which  we  shall  often  hear,  namely, 
'  foreshortening.' 

Yet  a  nose  is  not  such  a  very  alarming  shape.  Certainly 
not  as  difficult  to  draw  as  a  hand  pointing  straight  out  of 
the  picture.  It  is  merely  two  small  cavities  placed  at  an 
equal  distance  from  each  other,  winged  in  flesh  and  protected 
by  a  round  tip  and  bridged  to  the  face  by  bone  and  gristle. 

When  you  draw  the  nose  full  face  draw  the  shadow  of  the 
bridge,  and  the  shadow  under  the  tip  of  the  nose,  and  the 
shadow  beneath  the  nose,  boldly.  Think,  if  you  will,  of  the 
keel  of  a  ship,  of  the  corner  of  a  box.  Don't  be  fearful  of 
making  the  nose  ugly.  Rather  a  big,  well-shaped  nose  than 
one — as  we  see  so  often  in  our  drawings — timid,  feeble,  and 
of  little  account. 
68 


Head^  Face^  Features^  Hair 

Your  nose  will  in  all  probability  be  smaller  than  the  first 
example  selected.  It  is  a  bold  nose.  It  has  a  firm  bridge, 
a  rounded  and  full  tip,  curved  nostrils. 

Examine  your  own  nose  in  a  glass,  and  try  to  sketch  it  as 
I  have  indicated  in  the  first  example.  Begin  by  drawing  an 
upright  line,  then  trace  down  each  side  of  this  line  the  bridge 
of  the  nose,  with  the  shadows — I  hope  you  are  sitting  with 
the  light  coming  from  one  side — cast  by  it.  Notice  the  round 
tip,  and  on  each  side  the  two  little  curved  nostrils,  and  round 
each  nostril  the  wing  of  flesh.  These  will  probably  be  only 
slightly  defined,  for  these  lines  deepen  with  age.  Beneath 
the  tip  of  the  nose  a  shadow  will  fall,  and  also  on  the  very 
tip  will  be  a  fainter  but  decided  little  shadow.  The  shape 
of  this  shadow  on  the  tip  of  your  nose  is  very  important. 

If  your  nose  is  slightly  tip-tilted,  then  this  shadow  will  be 
sharp  and  incline  in  a  three-cornered  shape  upward. 

If  your  nose  is  Roman,  then  this  shadow  will  dip  down  in 
a  firm  half-moon  shape. 

Now  incline  your  head  away  at  a  slight  angle,  and  observe 
your  nose. 

Again  you  will  notice  the  long  straight  line  of  the  bridge, 
and  the  firm  tip,  and  from  the  tip  you  get  the  decided  tri- 
angular shape  of  the  under  part  of  the  nose,  with  the  two 
nostrils  inclining  toward  the  centre.  The  near  nostril  is  more 
clearly  seen  than  the  far  nostril.  It  is  round  and  full  and 
narrows  toward  the  tip,  and  the  wing  of  it  curves  in  a  very 
decided  line. 

If  you  close  your  mouth  and  draw  in  a  deep  breath  through 
your  nose  you  will  notice  that  your  nostrils  will  quiver  and 
expand,  and  if  you  draw  your  upper  lip  down  over  your 
teeth,  your  nostrils  will  elongate.  These  observations  help 
us  to  understand  the  muscles  and  movement  of  the  nose. 

The  nostril  of  the  far  side  is  slightly  hidden  by  the  point 
of  the  nose,  and  presents  a  three-cornered  form,  the  nostril 
inclining  toward  the  tip,  the  wing  of  the  nostril  correspond- 
ingly shaped. 

Again  we  notice  the  shadows  on  the  tip  of  the  nose,  the 

69 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

shadow  on  the  bridge,  the  shadow  of  the  indented  lip  where 
it  falls  in  a  dimple  above  the  upper  lip. 

The  line  that  extends  from  the  nostril  to  the  corner  of  the 
lip  may  also  attract  your  notice  ;  this  is  the  curve  which 
deepens  when  we  are  moved  to  expressions  of  mirth  or  grief. 

Throw  up  your  head. 

Your  nose  rises  boldly  like  a  small  peak  on  your  face,  the 
nostrils  wide  at  the  base,  narrow  to  a  point ;  the  wing  of  each 
enclosed  nostril  is  also  long  and  narrow. 

Persuade  your  sister  to  bend  her  head  downward. 

The  nose  rises  from  the  broad  brow  pointing  downward  and 
outward,  hiding  the  upper  lip  and  possibly  part  of  the  mouth 
and  chin.  In  this  position  we  get  the  tip  of  the  nose  very 
well  defined.  If  our  model  be  a  child,  the  width  of  the 
delicate  nostrils  is  very  apparent. 

The  nose  seen  in  profile,  with  the  head  flung  aside,  is  sharply 
defined  ;  the  bridge  slender,  end  slightly  tilted,  nostril  curved, 
and  the  wing  of  the  nostril  well  marked. 

Now,  we  know  that  a  nose  has  two  sides,  two  nostrils  ; 
we  know  also  that  there  is  another  eye,  another  eyebrow 
on  the  far  side  of  the  face.  We  must  never  draw  a  profile 
as  if  it  were  a  flat  surface  (as  we  are  sometimes  inclined  to  do), 
but  suggest  by  the  curve  of  the  eyebrow,  the  eye,  nose,  and 
mouth,  the  side  of  the  face  that  we  are  not  drawing. 

For  the  head  itself  is  a  ball-shaped  object,  as  we  must 
never  in  any  circumstances  forget. 

We  should  take  every  opportunity  of  studying  noses  in 
reproductions  of  pictures.  The  Old  Masters  never  scamped 
difficult  problems  of  drawing ;  and  you  may  also  gain  a 
certain  amount  of  knowledge  by  examining  the  photographs 
in  the  daily  papers.  Once  embarked  on  this  fascinating 
study  of  features,  you  will  glean  helpful  ideas  from  all  sorts 
of  unexpected  sources. 

Always  try  to  simplify  your  objects  ;   and  accept  a  wrinkle 
from  the  Old  Masters,  who  usually  posed  their  models  in 
half-lights — namely,   with  the   light  coming  from   one   side 
only. 
70 


Head^  Face^  Features^  Hair 

A  nose  seen  between  two  lights  is  more  difficult  to  draw 
than  a  nose  seen  in  one  light — and  that  from  above. 

And  there  is  such  an  infinite  variety  of  noses  !  You  can 
amuse  yourself  by  noticing  the  different  characteristics  :  snub, 
aquiline,  peaky,  pointed,  inquisitive.  Artists  declare  that  a 
pretty  nose  is  seldom  seen,  but  a  pretty  mouth,  I  think,  is 
almost  as  rare. 

Only  once  do  I  remember  to  have  seen  the  ideal  mouth,  the 
Cupid's  bow,  with  the  pouting,  rather  full  under  lip,  and  the 
upper  lip  rising  into  two  small  dimpled  curves.  But  how 
many  times  do  we  see  long  lips — the  mouth  that  shuts  with 
a  thin,  ugly,  straight  line,  the  loosely  drawn  under  lip,  the 
pursed-up,  discontented  mouth  ? 

Hold  up  your  glass  and  study  your  own  mouth. 

The  mouth  is  sometimes  depicted  as  a  mere  slit  in  the  face  ; 
curved  upward  it  represents  mirth,  curved  downward  grief  or 
distress. 

Try  first  sketching  your  lips  closed.  Draw  a  single  line 
across  your  paper  as  a  guide,  and  finding  the  thickest  part  of 
the  lips  in  the  middle,  sketch  the  flattened  pyramid  shape  of 
the  upper  lip  and  the  lower  lip  with  one  long  curve. 

Next  you  will  notice  that  the  upper  lip  is  composed  of 
two  slightly  indented  curves.  The  under  lip  probably  curves 
slightly  in  the  centre. 

Next  we  look  for  the  shadows.  The  upper  lip,  protruding 
slightly,  casts  a  shadow,  as  does  the  lower  lip  in  a  lesser  degree. 
Observe  wrinkles  or  folds,  the  shape  of  the  corners,  and  the 
soft  indication  above  the  upper  lip  and  beneath  the  nose. 

Then,  for  a  second  example,  we  might  smile  at  our  own 
reflection  and  draw  the  parted  lips,  revealing  the  teeth  within. 
Here  we  have  the  curved  line.  Draw  the  upper  lip  and  lower 
lip  first,  and  then  the  arc  of  teeth  within,  remembering  that 
the  lips  hide  the  greater  part,  and,  therefore,  not  making  these 
few  teeth  too  many,  too  big,  or  too  prominent. 

The  corners  of  the  lips  will,  no  doubt,  throw  a  deep  shadow, 
and  the  lips  curving  round  the  teeth  will  also  be  thrown  into 
shadow  ;    shadows  there  will  be  on,  and  under,  the  lip.     The 

71 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

curve  of  the  cheek  will  help  to  accentuate  the  smile,  and  the 
groove  running  downward  from  the  nose  to  the  mouth  expands 
over  the  teeth. 

When  drawing  the  mouth  in  profile  we  must  of  necessity 
ask  some  kind  person  to  pose. 

Try  first  drawing  the  mouth  closed,  then  open. 

Closed,  the  mouth  is  a  curious  little  triangle.  We  at  once 
notice  that  the  upper  lip  extends  slightly  beyond  the  under 
lip  ;  we  notice,  too,  the  depth  of  the  upper  lip  and  the  more 
sharply  decided  line  as  compared  with  the  rounded  under  lip. 
We  must  look  for  shadows,  and  mark  the  opening  of  the 
mouth,  and  anything  that  will  help  to  explain  the  corners  of 
the  mouth,  for  these  are  exceedingly  expressive,  and  change 
with  baffling  quickness. 

Now  look  in  your  glass  once  more. 

Throw  up  your  head,  and  your  mouth  follows  the  curve  of 
your  face,  forming  a  semicircle.  You  see  under  the  under 
lip,  do  you  not  ?  And  the  upper  lip  rises  in  a  very  distinct 
and  acute  curve. 

Now  ask  your  friend  to  bend  the  head  downward. 

Do  we  not  get  the  position  reversed  ?  The  curve  of  the 
lips  is  now  thrown  down,  the  centre  points  downward,  the 
corners  curl  upward. 

And  this  we  offer  as  a  really  sound  piece  of  advice.  When 
you  wish  to  study  faces  do  not  draw  a  stolidly  staring, 
bored  countenance,  but  ask  the  friend  who  is  '  sitting ' 
to  scowl,  or  smile,  to  look  pleased,  or  disgusted.  It  is  in- 
finitely easier  to  study  features  in  motion  than  when  set  firm 
as  if  moulded  in  wax. 

Our  little  friends  Mr  Sad  and  Mr  Glad,  whom  we  are  so 
fond  of  tracing  on  the  margin  of  our  books,  have  a  good  deal 
to  commend  their  honest  countenances.  They  have  the  lines 
of  laughing  and  crying  faces  crudely  expressed.  With  chin 
upraised  and  eyes  twinkling,  cheeks  pushed  up  in  dimpling 
curves,  and  nostrils  and  lips  curled  upward — behold  Mr  Glad  1 

And,  when  we  cry,  do  not  our  lips  curve  down  in  unutter- 
able woe,  dragging  our  cheeks  in  straight  lines  from  our 
72 


Head^  Face^  Features^  Hair 

nostrils,  puckering  our  eyes  into  sad  half-moons — like  Mr  Sad 
in  very  truth  ? 

While  you  are  studying  the  features,  choose  some  interest- 
ing subject  to  enliven  model  and  artist  alike.  Though  you 
may  not  complete  your  original  intention,  make  a  beginning 
on,  say,  the  subject  of  a  small  child  sniffing  up  a  slightly  dis- 
agreeable scent  from  a  small  bottle. 
Such  a  conception  may  provoke  such 
hilarious  amusement  that  your  drawing 
will  bubble  with  laughter. 

Art  students  often  begin  their  studies 
by  painting  the  head  of  an  old  man  or 
old  woman.  And  the  reason  is  that  it 
is  far  easier  to  draw  age  than  youth, 
for  the  features  become  more  marked 
with  age  and  therefore  more  distinct. 
Compare,  for  instance,  the  nose  of  the 
old  man  and  the  nose  of  the  infant; 
the  tiny  button  of  a  baby's  nose,  as 
against  the  big  bold  bridge,  the  heavily 
marked  nostril.  As  the  saying  goes, 
one  can  hardly  '  miss '  the  drawing  of 
an  old  man's  nose. 

Compare  the  mouth  of  a  young  girl, 
full  and  pouting,  parted  over  the 
white  teeth,  and  the  old  man's,  grim, 
straight,  and  lined ;  and  the  wide  clear 
gaze  of  the  boy  with  the  heavily  lidded  eye  of  age.  Even  the 
ear  of  the  old  is  loose  in  shape  and  wrinkled  about  the  lobe. 

Which  brings  us  to  those  very  important  organs — the  ears. 
There  is  something  peculiarly  interesting  in  the  drawing  of 
an  ear.  There  is  the  soft  texture,  the  delicacy  of  its  curves, 
and  the  contrasting  shapes  of  the  large  upper  part  and  the 
slender  lobe.  It  is  a  feature  of  which  the  amateur  too  often 
falls  foul.  For  some  inexplicable  reason  the  ear  in  a  weak 
drawing  is  often  its  worst  feature.  Invariably  it  is  given  a 
queer  little  waist  at  the  central  part. 

73 


Fig.  29.    Me  Glad  and 
Me  Sad 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

Where  several  young  artists  are  gathered  together  they 
can  easily  draw  each  other's  ears  in  turn.  For,  with  all  the 
goodwill  in  the  world,  we  cannot  study  this  feature  alone  and 
with  a  hand-glass. 

The  ear  is  an  oblong,  the  upper  part  of  which  is  wide,  while 
the  lower  part  contracts  toward  the  lobe.  It  bears  a  slight 
resemblance  to  a  huge  interrogation  mark.  The  ear  is  com- 
posed of  so  many  exquisite  curves  that  it  presents  a  somewhat 
baffling  subject  to  the  pencil  of  timid  young  artists. 

Look  at  the  ear  as  one  mass  and  do  not  at  first  trouble 
yourselves  with  its  manifold  hollows  and  curves.  Sketch 
very  lightly  the  oblong  shape.  By  slicing  the  corners  of  the 
upper  part,  and  carving  a  considerable  portion  from  the 
lower  part,  you  have  the  angles  of  the  ear. 

Then  look  at  the  large  and  beautiful  curve  of  the  outer 
rim  and  the  flattened  upper  space  which  creeps  from  behind 
the  fold  nearest  the  cheek  and  swells  into  a  smooth  surface 
dipping  down  toward  the  lobe  ;  the  orifice  itself  is  a  dark  and 
mysterious  little  cavern  tucked  beneath  the  coral-pink  pro- 
jections nearest  the  cheek. 

Having  marked  and  sketched  the  biggest  shapes,  we  should 
turn  our  attention  to  the  folds.  The  ears  of  young  people 
are  usually  of  a  simple  pattern.  In  the  example  given,  there 
is  only  one  large  fold  curving  round  the  upper  rim.  There  is 
also  the  deep  curve  or  dimple  of  the  inner  part,  and  this  we 
can  shade,  following  the  shape  with  our  pencil  and  exaggerat- 
ing rather  than  losing  the  indentations  ;  within  the  outer  rim 
we  have  a  deeper  shadow,  while  the  orifice  gives  us  our  darkest 
tone.  We  might  also  suggest  the  shadows  behind  and  under 
the  ear. 

The  ear  that  you  are  trying  to  sketch  may  not  resemble  the 
ear  in  this  example,  but  of  course  it  is  '  up  to  you  '  to  draw 
yours  as  faithfully  as  possible.  The  ear  you  are  sketching 
may  be  wider,  it  may  have  a  more  flattened  appearance,  the 
lobe  may  not  be  pointed. 

It  is  difficult  to  suggest  any  rules  to  help  in  the  drawing  of 
an  ear.  The  main  thing  to  bear  in  mind  is  the  use  of  the  ear. 
74 


Fig.  30.    Ears 


74 


Head^  Face^  Features^  Hair 

As  an  organ  of  hearing  it  rarely  lies  as  flat  against  the  head  as 
some  young  artists  depict  it. 

Seen  from  the  front,  it  lies  apparently  very  close  to  the 
scalp,  but  from  the  back  the  ear  presents  a  very  different 
appearance.  When  it  is  the  ear  of  a  small  boy  with  his  hair 
cropped  smooth,  it  will  often  project  in  a  very  singular  fashion. 

The  ear  rises  from  the  head,  a  flat  trumpet-shaped  opening 
to  catch  sounds.  The  projecting  cup  extends  and  rolls  over 
in  a  large  fold  or  curve,  hiding  the  upper  part  from  view,  and 
revealing  only  a  tiny  portion  of  the  lobe.  The  position  of  the 
ear,  the  way  in  which  it  is  moulded  on  the  rounded  receding 
curve  of  the  skull  and  the  cheek,  and  just  above  the  juncture 
of  the  jaw,  can  be  plainly  seen.  Open  and  shut  the  mouth 
and  feel  the  motion  with  your  finger-tip  under  the  lobe  of  the 
ear. 

Seen  from  the  front,  and  almost  full  view,  we  have  an 
elongated  shape.  The  upper  part,  though  flattened  and 
receding  with  the  receding  side  of  the  head,  still  presents 
the  fullest  curve,  and  the  lobe  is  as  a  drooping  or  pendent 
shape. 

Mark  the  large  folds  first,  and  then  the  inner  curves,  and 
the  shadows  beneath  and  within  the  ear.  One  fold  tucks 
behind  the  other  fold,  resembling,  so  it  often  seems,  the  petals 
of  a  pink  rose. 

Present  these  folds  simply ;  mark  the  shadows  crisply — 
that  is,  with  quick,  bright  touches  of  the  pencil.  In  the  fore- 
shortened position  a  man's  cheek  swelling  forward  will  hide  a 
portion  of  the  ear  with  whiskers  and  with  beard. 

If  you  should  happen  to  be  one  of  a  group  of  young  artists 
who  have  taken  the  opportunity  of  alternately  sketching  and 
sitting,  you  will  find  that  it  is  helpful,  interesting,  and  perhaps 
surprising,  to  lay  your  sketches  side  by  side  at  the  end  of  a 
sitting  and  compare  the  various  shapes  of  the  various  ears. 

Some  ears  lie  flat  on  the  head,  others  stick  out.  Some  ears 
have  long  lobes  ;  in  others  the  lobe  is  small  and  pointed  ; 
others  again  have  no  lobe  at  all.  There  is  little  chance  of 
being  bored  with  a  too-uniform  pattern. 

75 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

Hair  is  a  fascinating  theme  for  the  artist,  whether  it  be  the 
bobbed  and  shingled  hair  of  the  modern  girl,  the  floating  locks 
of  the  mermaid,  the  small  boy's  cropped  poll,  or  the  silvery 
ringlets  of  old  age. 

Hair  is  a  strangely  deceptive  substance.  It  expresses, 
though  it  veils,  the  form  from  which  it  springs.  It  may  lie 
thick  as  a  cloak,  or  as  lightly  as  the  fluff  of  a  feather  ;  it  can 
be  coiled  as  massively  as  gleaming  metal,  or  crimped  with 
strange  outstanding  puffs  and  bushes  ;  it  may  be  clipped 
short  as  a  beard  or  trained  in  wisps  of  whiskers.  There  is 
no  end  to  the  tricks  played  by  (and  upon)  the  hairs  of  our 
head. 

Small  wonder  that  we  find  hair  a  difficult,  baffling  subject ! 

Says  Mary  plaintively  : 

"  My  hair  " — she  is  of  course  speaking  of  a  drawing — "  looks 
like  a  wig." 

"  And  mine  like  a  doormat,"  adds  Madge,  even  more 
plaintively. 

The  reason  why  the  hair  in  our  drawings  resembles  wigs 
and  doormats  is  that  when  drawing  the  substance  of  the  hair 
itself  we  forget  the  shape  beneath  the  hair.  Also,  that  hair 
has  very  peculiar  qualities  of  its  own.  Every  coil,  every 
cluster  of  curls,  every  curl,  has  its  own  shape,  its  own  light 
and  shade.  It  has  a  beginning  and  an  ending.  Hair  doesn't 
rise  stiff  and  stark  from  the  face  and  head  like  a  new  brush, 
but  in  soft  down,  in  short,  silky  hairs  merging  into  long  locks. 
False  hair  and  false  beards  look  false  because  they  do  not 
grow  gradually  as  hair  grows  from  the  skin. 

Note  the  way  in  which  the  hair  springs  from  the  scalp,  the 
thickness  of  the  roots,  the  silky  tendrils  of  the  temples,  the 
soft  down  at  the  nape  of  the  neck.  When  we  are  young  our 
hair  springs  thick  and  long.  When  we  approach  old  age  the 
hairs  thin,  not  suddenly,  but  gradually.  And  the  reason 
that  shingled  hair  has  an  artificial  appearance  when  seen 
from  the  back  lies  in  the  fact  that  the  barbers  shave  the 
smooth  fine  hairs  on  the  nape  of  the  neck. 

Look  at  Rosemary's  little  curls.  The  hair  clasps  the  little 
76 


Head^  Face^  Features^  Hair 

head  with  the  daintiest  web  of  silk.  Note  the  curve  of  each 
curl,  the  wave,  the  kink,  and  the  final  upward  fluffy  thrust. 
Diana's  bobbed  hair,  though  stiff  and  prim,  has  strong  light 
and  shadows.  If  we  shade  it  as  one  mass,  it  will  naturally 
look  mat-like.  But  Diana's  dark  hair  covers  the  shape  of 
the  crown,  and  the  light  strikes  on  the  curve  of  the  head  and 
reveals  its  shape. 

Take  a  single  lock  of  hair,  and  mark  its  shape  as  if  it  were 
a  single  object,  instead  of  a  mass  of  fine  hairs  falling  together. 
Draw  first  the  general  shape.  Trailing  as  it  does,  without 
touching  or  clinging  to  the  shoulder,  we  observe  its  curious 
snake-like  appearance.     Then  lightly  draw  that  shape. 

Next  we  notice  a  twist  in  the  lock.  Draw  the  twist ; 
within  the  twist  a  shadow  is  cast  by  the  thick  over-hanging 
mass ;  draw  that  shadow.  Another  shadow  we  observe 
beneath  the  lower  curve ;  indicate  that  also,  likewise  the 
several  broad  shadows  which  will  probably  appear  above  the 
thickest  mass.  That  being  done,  we  sit  back  and  look  at 
our  drawing  critically.  Too  solid,  we  say,  and  not  sufficiently 
hairy. 

Hair,  unless  very  wet  or  thickly  saturated  with  oil,  has  a 
wayward  disposition. 

Within  the  lock  you  will  probably  note  a  parting  of  several 
hairs,  extending  from  the  upper  part  to  the  lower  kink  or 
curl.  Then  note  some  of  these  separate  hairs,  and  indicate 
with  the  lightest  possible  touch. 

Diana's  bobbed  hair,  stiff  and  prim,  has  valuable  lights  and 
shadows. 

First  sketch  the  shape  of  Diana's  head,  next  look  for  the 
parting  from  which  the  dark  masses  of  hair  arise  and  fall 
about  the  ears,  brow,  and  neck.  Draw  the  line  of  the  parting, 
the  dividing-line  of  the  hair. 

On  one  side  you  will  notice  a  very  sharp  little  shadow 
defining  the  crown  of  the  head  ;  sketch  this  lightly.  From 
the  crown  the  hair  springs  and  catches  the  light.  Cropped 
firm  and  square,  the  shadows  beneath  the  lower  edges  must 
of  necessity  be  also  firm  and  angular.     Across  the  light  spaces 

77 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

you  will  probably  detect  hairs.  Draw  some  of  these  hairs. 
They  will  '  break  '  the  light  and  give  a  hairy  appearance  to 
what  might  otherwise  appear  rather  like  metal  or  woven  silk. 

Hair  that  is  frizzy,  and  grows  golliwog-fashion  from  the 
scalp,  must  be  drawn  with  the  lightest  touch.  Hair  smooth 
and  silken,  and  parted  and  worn  close  to  the  head,  can  be 
drawn  with  more  firmness.  But  there  is  no  general  rule  to 
be  followed  with  safety.  Hair  is  so  diverse  in  tint  and  texture 
that  only  by  constant  practice  can  we  '  make  good  '  with  our 
pencils. 

When  drawing  hair  we  should  keep  a  light  but  not  a  feeble 
touch.  Draw  with  delicacy  and  look  for  stray  hairs  to  break 
the  firm  masses. 

Babette's  thick  plait  offers  another  variation.  Ask  her  to 
turn  her  head  aside  and  sketch  the  back  of  the  head  and  hair, 
the  parting,  the  smooth  hair  covering  the  crown  and  then 
dividing  and  twisting  into  a  silky  plait.  If  the  drawing  of 
the  plait  gives  you  trouble,  practise  with  some  twisted  skeins 
of  coloured  wool,  or  silk  ;  only  recollect  that  in  this  case  the 
material  will  be  of  equal  thickness,  whereas  the  plait  of  hair 
graduates  from  thick  strong  roots  to  wispy  tail. 

The  movements  of  the  body,  the  action  of  wind  and  weather, 
all  affect  the  hair  of  the  head. 

Indeed,  the  little  details  of  floating  hair  and  flying  beard 
are  invaluable  when  we  sketch  figures  in  motion. 

Young  artists  will  draw  people  dashing  through  space, 
flying  down  or  upstairs,  chasing  balls,  bowling  hoops,  with 
their  hair  as  neat  and  smooth  as  if  they  were  calm  and  motion- 
less, whereas  ruffled  hair  will  give  the  effect  of  movement. 
In  this  age  of  tight  and  narrow  garments,  when  flowing  robes 
and  cloaks  and  long  veils  are  seldom  seen,  hair  is  an  asset  we 
dare  not  neglect. 


78 


Fig.  32.    Baby's  Head 


78 


CHAPTER  VII 

Drawing  People  in  Right  Proportions 

WHEN  first  we  draw  human  beings  we  are  very 
much  inchned  to  draw  the  child  and  the  man  in 
the  same  proportions.  Indeed,  it  is  a  mistake  we 
invariably  commit. 

We  draw  a  tall  man  with  long  legs  and  swinging  arms,  and 
we  draw  at  his  side  a  little  man  with  short  striding  legs  and 
swinging  arms.  We  label  the  tall  man  '  father,'  and  the 
little  man  '  son.' 

But  they  are  not  a  man  and  a  child,  they  are  merely  a  man 
and  a  smaller  man.  Sometimes  we  have  an  uncomfortable 
feeling  that  our  children  do  not  look  very  childish,  and  we 
complain  in  discouragement :  "  I  canH  make  my  little  boy 
look  like  a  boy  !  " 

It  would  seem  perfectly  logical  to  draw  children  as  little 
people,  and  yet,  if  we  pause  to  reflect,  is  it  really  so  ? 

As  a  kitten  is  different  from  a  cat,  a  chick  from  a  hen,  so 
must  a  child  be  different  from  a  man. 

Have  you  ever  remarked  to  yourself  the  huge  size  of  Baby's 
head  in  comparison  with  his  body  ? 

Though  the  head  is  large,  the  features  are  almost  negligible, 
the  tiny  neck  is  a  mere  roll  of  fat.  Baby  has  a  large  round 
eye,  a  flat  wide  nostril,  a  button  of  a  nose,  and  a  half-open, 
flower-like  mouth.     (See  Fig.  32.) 

The  months  and  the  years  slowly  pass,  Baby's  features 
form,  his  head  develops,  his  body  grows,  his  limbs  extend. 

Compare  the  photographs  of  Pamela  at  one  year  and 
Pamela  at  twelve  years  ;  and  look  well  at  Pamela  when  she 
trips  beside  her  aunt. 

If  we  draw  Martin  and  his  father  sitting  side  by  side  on  a 

79 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

bench  watching  a  football-match,  in  all  probability  we  should 
draw  a  big  man,  and  at  his  side  a  little  man  less  than  half 
his  size.  Martin  may  inherit  the  square  shape  of  his  father's 
shoulders,  but  they  will  be  less  than  half  in  bulk.  The  thick, 
strong,  muscular  neck  of  Martin's  father  is  very  different 
from  Martin's  thin  weedy  little  one.  The  head  of  the  man  is 
well  shaped  and  firmly  balanced,  but  the  boy's  will  probably 
look  very  large,  a  trifle  bumpy  and  big  behind  the  ears.  The 
ears  of  Martin's  father  lie  flat  against  his  close-cropped  hair, 
whereas  Martin's  stick  out  from  his  thin  jaws  and  neck  like 
little  handles  on  a  big  vase.  Martin's  legs  are  thin  and 
lacking  in  calf,  his  feet  consequently  appear  rather  too  large 
for  his  height ;  but  his  father's  legs  are  finely  shaped,  muscular, 
and  well  proportioned. 

Now  having  considered  these  few  points,  would  you  still 
feel  inclined  to  draw  Martin  and  his  father  with  the  same 
proportions  ? 

There  are  a  few  accepted  rules  that  are  useful  to  remember, 
though  we  must  never  blindly  follow  any  rules,  for  we  know 
the  human  figure  is  capable  of  every  variety  of  form.  Still, 
as  a  check  to  an  observation  that  cannot  always  be  correct, 
as  a  trifling  guide  when  perplexing  moments  beset  us,  these 
facts  are  worth  noting. 

A  grown  man  of  good  proportion,  when  standing  erect, 
usually  measures  seven  and  a  half  heads  high.  Remember, 
however,  that  this  is  the  proportion  of  a  perfectly  formed 
man.  A  very,  very  tall  man  would  not  have  an  elongated 
body,  but  longer  legs.  The  bodies  of  most  men  are  the  same 
length.  A  man  when  standing  with  his  arms  to  his  sides  will 
rest  the  tips  of  his  fingers  a  little  more  than  half-way  between 
his  hips  and  knees. 

A  figure  when  sitting  roughly  represents  three  lines  of  a 
fairly  equal  length,  measuring  from  the  nape  of  the  neck  to 
the  seat,  from  the  seat  to  the  knee,  from  the  knee  to  the  foot. 

An  elbow  usually  rests  in  the  hollow  below  the  waist,  as 
you  can  prove  for  yourself  by  clapping  your  arms  to  your  side. 

A  hand  measures  the  same  length  as  the  face.  Put  the 
80 


Fig.  33.   Pkopoetions  of  the  Human  Figure 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

palm  of  your  hand  against  your  chin  and  spread  your  fingers 
upward. 

A  nose  is  the  same  length  as  a  thumb.  The  ear  the  same 
length  as  a  nose. 

And,  having  gleaned  these  few  ordinarily  accepted  rules,  you 
will  probably  find  your  next  model  will  have  arms  too  long, 
legs  too  short,  and  a  nose  disagreeing  most  profoundly  with 
the  length  of  the  thumb.  Nature  is  a  law  unto  itself,  and  I 
bring  these  few  suggestions  to  you  with  some  misgivings. 

If  your  eye  insists  that  your  model  measures  but  five 
heads  high,  accept  that  as  a  fact.  Very  few  human  beings 
are  correctly  proportioned. 


n 


CHAPTER  VIII 

Drawing  Inanimate  Things 

HOUSES,  hats,  motor-cars,  chairs,  beds,  and  boats — 
all  these  and  many  other  inanimate  things  are  fruit- 
ful of  much  worry  for  the  young  and  inexperienced 
artist. 

"Why  is  it,"  we  ask  ourselves,  "that  the  hat  of  the  man 
in  my  drawing  does  not  look  as  if  it  would  fit  on  his  head  ? 
How  can  I  make  it  right  ?  " 

And  the  reply  comes,  "  Measure — measure  the  size  of  the 
hat  against  the  size  of  the  man's  head." 

It  may  be  that  the  hat  is  held  in  the  man's  hand,  or  that 
it  rests  against  his  chair,  in  which  case  measure  the  size  of 
the  hat  with  your  pencil  and  put  the  measurement  against  the 
man's  head.  In  all  probability  you  have  committed  the  very 
usual  mistake  of  making  the  hat  too  small  for  the  head. 

Hats  are  not  as  easy  to  draw  as  some  young  artists  seem 
to  believe.  The  depth  and  width  of  the  hat  can  be  the  most 
deceiving  and  perplexing  problem. 

Personally  I  never  hesitate  to  measure  hats  most  carefully 
against  the  heads  of  the  owners. 

Tall  hats  are  more  than  usually  difficult,  and  consequently 
more  often  than  not  wrongly  depicted.  The  term  '  tall '  is, 
to  begin  with,  a  misnomer.  In  the  old  days  of  rough  high 
beavers  and  curled  brims  the  words  '  tall '  or  '  high  '  were 
quite  appropriate.  But  nowadays  it  is  not  so,  as  you  can 
prove  for  yourself  by  placing  a  tall  hat  against  another 
object,  and  checking  its  height ;  for  instance,  against  the 
leg  of  a  dining-room  chair.  You  will  find  that  the  hat  barely 
reaches  the  first  rail  of  the  front  leg.  Which  brings  under 
our    consideration    ordinary    chairs,    queer    enough    looking 

m 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

affairs  in  our  early  drawings,  represented  with  very  small 
(and  always  unpadded)  seats,  perched  on  long,  crooked,  and 
stilt-like  legs. 

The  seat  of  a  chair  is  a  little  lower  than  an  adult's  knee. 
How  uncomfortable  it  would  be  were  it  otherwise  !  And  the 
back  of  the  chair  (I  refer  to  the  ordinary  dining-room  chair) 
lies  half-way  between  the  knee  and  the  hip,  and  level  with  the 
outstretched  hand  of  a  grown  person  of  average  height.  Ask 
your  mother,  father,  or  big  brother  to  stand  for  a  second  by 
a  chair  and  check  these  proportions  for  yourself.  The  height 
of  a  dining-room  table  is  higher,  but  only  a  little  higher  than 
the  height  of  a  seated  man's  elbow.  An  inexperienced  artist  is 
inclined  to  draw  the  table  far  too  high.  And  a  table  either 
too  high  or  too  low  would  complicate  matters  pretty  con- 
siderably for  the  diner. 

A  chair  is  an  interesting  subject  to  draw.  Even  the 
roughest  and  most  primitive  has  good  lines  and  a  certain 
grace.  First  sketch  the  skeleton  shape,  the  seat  and  the 
four  legs,  as  you  would  a  box,  by  drawing  lines  from  point 
to  point.  This  will  enable  you  to  get  a  clear  idea  of  the 
perspective.  Then  compare  the  curves  of  the  back  legs  with 
those  of  the  front,  carry  the  curve  from  the  legs  up  to  the 
back,  and  add  the  arms. 

Chairs  there  are  of  every  description,  lounge-chairs,  and 
chairs  fashioned  out  of  all  kinds  of  materials.  When  chairs 
are  given  for  tests  in  drawing  examinations  they  are  usually 
the  simple  wooden  or  Windsor  chairs,  and  if  you  should  feel 
inspired  to  try  your  hand  in  this  direction,  add  something  of 
an  outside  interest,  a  velvet  or  silk  cushion,  a  fur  stole  or  a 
woollen  scarf;  or,  better  still,  persuade  Pussy  to  lie  curled 
upon  the  seat.  Then  you  will  have  several  kinds  of  textures. 
Couches,  settees,  and  sofas  are  often  under-represented  in  our 
sketches.  They  are  really  very  large  objects,  and  made  to 
hold  a  grown  person  when  lying  full  length. 

Beds,  too,  are  commonly  shorn  of  half  their  width  and 
length.  A  bed,  even  a  small  one,  occupies  a  good  deal  of  space. 
If  we  err  over  the  length  and  width,  we  are  on  the  other 
64 


I  ke  5ea  h  of 
achaiv 
IS  a 

Sn  adulb's   /rnee. 


a  littlo 
ttian 
elLo.w 

uohcru 

A  Kat 

IS  a  iattlc.  larger 
tKau  ttio  head. 


^ChiWs  /)ed  IS  ^  little. 


Fig.  34.   The  Peoportions  of  Chairs,  Tables,  Hats,  Beds 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

hand  very  prone  to  draw  beds  a  great  deal  too  high  from  the 
ground.  The  old-fashioned  four-poster  with  its  curtains  and 
plumes  belongs  to  a  bygone  age.  The  bed  of  to-day  is  usually 
low  and  lightly  framed.  Would  it  not  be  extremely  awkward 
if  it  were  higher  ?  We  should  certainly  require  a  ladder  to 
climb  into  the  beds  depicted  in  the  drawings  of  many  young 
artists. 

When  drawing  tables,  couches,  or  beds  make  a  point  of  first 
drawing  the  framework,  the  long  seats  of  the  sofas,  the  legs, 
and  then  the  backs  and  the  arms.  Tables  fall  naturally  into 
simple  forms  with  the  top  first  decided,  and  then  the  angle  of 
the  legs.  Suggest  the  length,  width,  and  height  of  the  bed, 
adding  afterward  minor  details  of  sheets,  blankets,  pillows, 
and  counterpane. 

Boats  we  rarely  draw  large  enough  to  hold  the  crew,  let 
alone  the  passengers  ;  motor-cars  are  usually  depicted  far  too 
small  for  their  owners. 

Heads,  faces,  and  shoulders  emerge  happily  enough  from 
the  tops  of  cars,  carriages,  and  boats,  but  it  is  often  in  the 
nature  of  a  conundrum  to  find  accommodation  for  the  unfor- 
tunate bodies  and  legs.  Therefore,  always  draw  these  hidden 
limbs,  for  even  if  you  make  mistakes  with  shapes  and  pro- 
portions, the  mere  fact  of  sketching  bodies  and  legs  will  serve 
to  remind  you  that  a  certain  space  is  required  ;  and  they  can 
be  erased  as  you  proceed  with  your  drawings. 

Another  difficulty  that  besets  us  is  the  matter  of  spacing 
the  floors  of  the  houses,  the  windows,  and  doorways.  Tenants 
are  often  seen  strolling  about  their  front  lawns,  and  the 
houses  in  the  background  have  windows  so  closely  presented 
that  nothing  larger  than  a  well-proportioned  mouse  could 
possibly  move  in  the  rooms.  Yet  a  room,  even  a  small 
room,  is  a  considerable  height.  Your  father  does  not  knock 
his  head  against  the  ceiling.  He  stands  erect,  and  there  is 
ample  space  above  his  head.  Try  to  remember  that  the 
gentleman  and  lady  require  rooms  large  enough  to  use.  This 
matter  of  drawing  inanimate  things  in  proportion  is  chiefly 
a  matter  of  common  sense.  Leave  sufficient  space  between 
86 


Drawing  Inanimate  Things 

each  window  so  that  the  floors  are  not  crammed  closely 
together  and  the  windows  are  drawn  fairly  evenly.  Reflect 
how  uncomfortable  it  would  be  to  live  behind  windows 
sprinkled  haphazard  about  the  front  of  the  house  ! 

If  we  apply  a  good  deal  of  common  sense,  and  compare  the 
size  and  shape  of  one  thing  with  another,  we  shall  find  the 
difficulties  of  drawing  inanimate  things  gradually  fading 
away. 


87 


CHAPTER  IX 

Drawing  our  Pets  and  other  Animals 

FIDGETY-PHIL-WHO-WOULDN'T-SIT-STILL  has  a 
very  serious  rival  in  our  feathered  and  four-footed 
friends. 

We  can  reason  with  Fidgety  Phil,  but  no  power  on  earth 
can  prevail  if  Timmy  the  cat,  or  Spot  the  terrier,  wishes  to 
alter  his  pose.  It  will  signify  nothing  that  we  are  in  the 
middle  of  a  masterpiece  ;  and  the  fact  that  we  and  our  models 
are  well  acquainted  will  not,  by  any  means,  ease  the  situation  ; 
the  reverse  will  probably  be  the  case. 

My  dog  Prince  always  sat  on  my  sketch-book  when  he  spied 
on  the  face  of  his  mistress  a  certain  expression  which  con- 
veyed to  his  mind  that  a  sketch  of  himself  was  about  to  begin, 
instead  of  a  sensible  walk  on  the  hills. 

Dogs,  cats,  horses,  and  birds,  especially  birds,  no  sooner 
spy  a  pencil  and  a  piece  of  paper  than  up  go  their  heads, 
away  go  hoofs,  wings,  paws,  or  tails. 

In  the  first  place,  when  we  wish  to  draw  our  pets  we  must 
invest  in  a  very  large — we  might  almost  say  an  inexhaustible 
— store  of  patience  ;  in  the  second  place,  if  we  are  wise  we 
shall  sketch  our  models  when  they  are  at  rest ;  in  the  third, 
we  must  use  a  large  sheet  of  paper.  For  our  model  will  most 
assuredly  move,  and  if  we  are  properly  equipped  with  paper, 
we  can  make  a  fresh  start  without  any  erasing  or  smudging. 

We  must  also  be  thankful  for  small  mercies.  We  must 
sketch  an  ear  if  we  can't  see  a  head,  a  fraction  of  a  paw  if  the 
body  is  hidden,  a  comb  or  beak  if  that  is  all  that  meets  the 
eye. 

We  must,  in  short,  "  take  the  current  when  it  serves,  or 
lose  our  venture." 
88 


Our  Pets  and  other  Animals 


With  a  large  sheet  of  paper  and  one  or  two  pencils  ready 
pointed,  steal  near  to  Mufti  (the  cat,  Fig.  36),  sleepily  coiled 
on  a  couch,  and  begin. 

By  crouching  beside  Mufti  we  shall  have  a  fairly  close 
observation.  Preferably  choose  a  position  a  little  below  rather 
than  a  little  above.  It  is  usually  better  to  look  up  to  your 
model  than  down. 

Possibly  we  may  sigh  at  the  difficult  and  baffling  shape 
presented  by  Mufti. 

First,  however,  make  a 
rough  note  of  the  curious, 
almost  circular  shape,  and 
then  seek  for  any  definite 
'  bits.' 

Can  we  detect  any  of  the 
big  bone  shapes,  any  pro- 
jection of  the  spine,  neck, 
or  shoulder  ?  Yes ;  having 
traced  the  half-circle  of  the 
back  we  note  that  the  far 
shoulder  pushes  up  and 
presents  an  angle  (softened,  of  course,  by  the  fur),  from 
which  angle  the  loose  skin  slopes  in  a  gradual  curve  to  the 
head. 

Notice,  too,  that  the  large  pointed  ears  lie  opposite  each 
other,  and  a  line  drawn  from  ear  to  ear  will  give  the  tilt 
of  the  head.  Between  the  ears,  a  curved  line  following  the 
forehead  downward  will  strike  the  centre  of  the  face  between 
the  closed  eyes,  and  extended  downward  and  outward  will 
pass  over  the  projection  of  the  nose,  the  muzzle,  and  the 
mouth. 

Next  we  might  pay  attention  to  the  width  of  the  broad 
back  and  flanks. 

The  spine  can  be  traced  by  the  light  which  strikes  on  the 
fur,  the  tail  being,  as  we  know,  an  extension  of  the  spine. 

The  curious  square  mass  of  the  doubled-up  thigh  and  the 
leg  beneath  is  fairly  apparent. 

89 


Fig.  35.   Flttffy 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

Look  for  the  opposite  thigh  and  mark  any  projection,  for 
that  will  give  you  the  angle  of  both  flanks. 

Sketch  the  lower  part  of  the  face,  jot  down  the  position  of 
the  right  leg  upon  which  rests  the  head,  and  get  the  angle  of 
the  hind-leg  tucked  up  and  meeting  the  chin. 

Next  look  for  more  detail.  The  shape  of  the  ears,  the 
angle  of  the  eyes,  the  position  of  the  tiny  pink  nose — once 
those  three  things  are  settled  we  can  study  the  marking  on 
the  fur.  And  here  I  must  strike  a  note  of  warning.  The 
marking  is  very  misleading,  as  are  the  great  lumps  of  loose 
fur,  and  the  fluffy,  silky  down. 

First  get  your  facts,  and  here  the  word  '  facts  '  means  the 
big  bone  shapes — the  shape  of  the  skull,  the  shape  of  the 
body,  the  legs,  and  the  tail. 

Then  we  shall  know  we  are  clothing  a  frame  of  reasonable 
form. 

Having  arrived  at  tuis  stage,  then  comes  the  chance  to 
note  the  way  in  which  the  fur  follows  these  big  bone  shapes. 
First  draw  the  direction  of  the  fur  as  it  curves  over  bone  and 
muscle — then  the  marks,  stripes,  dots,  and  so  forth,  the 
smooth  silky  down  that  covers  the  ears,  the  soft  fluffiness 
undeif  the  limbs  and  about  the  muzzle,  and  the  thick  pro- 
tective length  of  the  fur  on  the  back. 

The  marking  on  the  fine  fur  will  be  more  delicate  than  the 
markings  on  the  thigh  and  back.  Use  your  pencil  with  a 
light  firm  touch. 

By  way  of  a  final  observation,  see  if  any  valuable  shadows 
have  been  omitted  where  the  firm  body  presses  on  the  ground, 
possibly  beneath  the  tail,  or  under  the  chin  and  paw. 

A  short-coated  pussy  with  black  fur  is  easier  to  draw  than 
a  striped  and  tabby  cat.  The  fur  being  short  and  unmarked 
will  not  conceal  and  confuse  the  structure  to  the  same  extent ; 
moreover,  the  light  will  strike  on  the  glossy  coat  and  define 
the  big  bony  shapes  more  sharply,  the  flanks,  thigh,  shoulder, 
head,  and  paws. 

Whether  we  sketch  Pussy  asleep  or  awake,  reclining  on  a 
wall,  or  playing  with  a  leaf,  we  cannot  fail  to  notice  his  invari- 
90 


M\ 


Our  Pets  and  other  Animals 

able  grace.  Never  do  you  see  an  awkward  or  ungainly  move- 
ment. Which  fact  alone  should  be  an  invaluable  training  for 
our  pencil.  From  the  tip  of  Pussy's  whiskers  to  the  tip  of  his 
tail,  mark  the  long  flowing  line  of  the  graceful  limbs,  the 
exquisite  curves. 

The  large  open  eye,  the  large  upright  ear,  these  are  very 


Fig.  37.  TiMMY 


characteristic  of  the  cat  tribe.  Mark  the  width  of  the 
cheeks,  the  short  blunted  nose,  the  receding  under-jaw. 
Note  also  the  stretch  of  the  cat's  mouth  when  open  ;  the 
muzzle  pulls  up  and  reveals  the  gape  at  the  back  of  the  mouth, 
and  the  upper  and  lower  jaw  square  one  with  the  other.  The 
tiger,  the  puma,  and  all  the  cat  tribe  share  these  peculiar 
characteristics. 

Robin  the  puma  (sketched  in  the  London  Zoo,  to  which 
he  was  presented  by  a  friend  of  ours,  having  outgrown  his 

91 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

pethood)  is  a  distant  relative  of  Mufti's,  and  for  all  I  know  to 
the  contrary  may  be  as  familiar  to  you  as  Mufti. 

Make  a  few  comparisons  between  the  household  pet  and 
the  '  American  lion.'  Robin  is  of  course  many  sizes  larger, 
and  of  a  stronger  and  more  powerful  breed.  His  limbs  are 
thick,  long,  and  sinewy,  his  head  small  compared  with  the 
muscular  neck,  his  ears  rounded.  Note  the  great  pawt 
and  note  also  the  large  extension  of  the  jaw  when  R^bin  is 
yawning. 

It  is  curious  to  reflect  that  for  one  study  of  a  bird  we  shall 
see  fifty  of  a  cat,  and  more  curious  when  we  consider  that 
with  birds  we  have  usually  a  fairly  close  association.  It  is 
true  that  birds  are  difficult  studies.  They  are  the  most 
elusive  models,  and  it  is  impossible  to  glean  more  than  quick, 
snap-shot  impressions  and  rough  notes,  and  in  that  we  prob- 
ably fin^  the  real  reason  for  neglect.  Birds  are  not  easy,  but 
they  are  inlensely  interesting.  With  all  their  wealth  of 
beauty  in  form  and  colour,  they  are  a  rich  harvest  for  the 
pencil  and  the  brush. 

Who,  for  instance,  could  be  more  attractive  than  the  perky 
little  robin  with  his  brown  coat  and  scarlet  waistcoat,  his 
sleek,  neat  plumage,  the  cock  of  his  bright  eye,  and  the  flick 
of  his  pointed  tail  ?  A  most  characteristic  little  gentleman  ! 
Search  your  memory,  and  try  to  sketch  him  out  of  your  head, 
and  preferably  with  your  brush. 

Make  a  bold  dash  at  catching  his  likeness.  Mark  the  long 
slope  of  his  back,  the  clean,  sharp  swelling  curve  from  the 
bill  downward,  the  intersecting  lines  of  the  tail  and  wing,  the 
short  bill  curved  above,  flattened  beneath,  the  eye  close  to 
the  bill,  the  slender  strength  of  the  tiny  legs,  the  perfect 
balance  on  the  long  talons. 

By  contrast,  too,  we  learn  much,  and  drive  observation 
deeper. 

Compare  the  singing  canary,  his  slim  golden  body  and 
dainty  limbs,  with  the  raucous-tongued  parrot,  his  powerful 
beak,  thick  talons,  and  muscular  thighs.  Contrast  the  sky- 
lark, the  exquisite  lightness  and  buoyancy  of  his  movement 
92 


Fig.  38.    Birds  at  Rest  and  in  Flight 


92 


Our  Pets  and  other  Animals 

and  form,  with  that  clumsy,  soft,  noiseless  bird  of  the  night 
— the  owl.  An  owl  is  a  good  introduction  to  the  study  of 
birds  ;  he  has  one  invaluable  asset — tracked  to  his  lair  by 
day,  he  can  be  observed  quite  closely.  His  is  a  simple  and 
comparatively  easy-to-observe  shape,  as  he  sits  huddled  on 
his  perch,  blinking  his  eyes,  a  quaint  compact  oblong  form, 
from  which  depends  a  soft  blunted  tail ;  with  shoulders 
humped  up  to  his  neck,  head  large  and  square,  and  talons  well 
tucked  under  the  soft  breast  feathers. 

Mark  the  large  hood-like  shape  of  the  head,  the  curious 
mask  effect  of  the  face  from  which  the  tiny  beak  emerges,  and 
the  eyes,  large,  round,  and  heavily  lidded,  and  encircled  by 
rays  of  softest  feathers.  Mark  the  rich  dark  shadows  of  the 
eye,  beak,  and  talon  with  a  firm  touch.  Because — and  this 
is  an  important  fact  when  we  are  drawing  birds — it  is  by 
insistence  upon  such  shadows,  the  soft  depth  of  the  eye,  and 
the  strong  curve  of  the  beak,  and  the  lines  of  the  tail  and  the 
wings,  that  we  obtain  our  effects. 

When  drawing  birds  try  to  keep  your  touch  crisp,  firm,  and 
light.  Birds  suggest  delicacy  more  than  strength.  The  bird 
on  the  wing  has  something  of  the  buoyancy  of  the  air  through 
which  he  flies. 

Consider  the  bony  framework  of  the  bird.  The  small  head 
and  pointed  beak  with  which  it  cleaves  the  air,  the  long  neck 
(having  twice  the  number  of  bones  of  a  human  being's),  the 
oblong  boat-shape  of  the  breast-bone,  ribs,  and  back,  the 
length  of  the  legs,  back  curved,  and,  above  all,  the  large  arm- 
or wing-bones  somewhat  resembling  the  zigzag  shape  of  the 
last  letter  of  the  alphabet — a  large  Z. 

When  sketching  birds  take  a  broad  observation.  Embrace 
the  whole  shape  in  a  glance,  and  sketch  that  shape.  Sketch 
the  slimness  of  its  body ;  if  it  is  a  bird  such  as  the  swallow, 
perching  and  at  rest,  sketch  the  balance  of  its  legs  and  feet, 
the  angle  of  its  head  ;  notice  the  way  in  which  the  wings 
fold  across  its  back  and  the  tail  depends.  Then  mark  the 
position  of  the  eye  with  regard  to  the  beak,  the  shape  of  the 
beak  itself,  the  short  curve  of  the  upper  bill  compared  with 

93 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

the  lower.  Look  swiftly  from  the  beak  to  the  eye,  from  the 
eye  to  the  beak.  Notice  the  shape  of  the  head.  Mark  all 
these  positions  lightly  before  settling  down  to  the  careful 
drawing  of  each  particular  feature. 

When  we  draw  the  head  of  a  girl  or  a  boy  we  draw  first  the 
cranium,  then  the  face,  and  lastly  the  features.  We  check 
one  thing  with  another,  as  we  have  discussed  very  fully  in 
an  early  chapter.  We  must  apply  the  same  methods  when 
we  are  drawing  our  pets,  animals  or  bipeds. 

Compare  (and  of  course  with  the  pencil)  the  beaks  of  birds  : 
the  beak  of  the  seagull  with  that  of  the  swallow,  or  with  that 
of  the  parrot.  In  the  last-mentioned  bird  the  beak  seems  to 
predominate  and  form  the  greater  part  of  the  skull.  Sketch 
the  curious  square  shape  of  the  parrot's  upper  and  lower 
beak,  together  with  the  wrinkled  skin,  and  the  sharp  cunning 
little  eye. 

Birds'  feet  and  legs  exhibit  astonishing  variations  of 
form.  What,  for  instance,  could  be  more  dissimilar  than 
a  stork's  leg  and  an  owl's,  the  duck's  web  and  the  swallow's 
claw,  the  eagle's  talon  and  the  sparrow's  ?  We  are  very 
much  inclined  to  be  careless  about  the  drawing  of  birds' 
feet.  How  often  do  we  see  the  leg  drawn  in  one  long  line, 
from  which  fork  three  long  strokes  (purporting  to  be  the 
claws),  and  the  talon  behind  the  leg,  corresponding  to  the 
heel  of  a  human  being,  forgotten — or,  if  not  quite  forgotten, 
almost  negligible  ? 

Note,  also,  that  when  the  bird  with  the  taloned  feet  moves 
along  a  flattened  surface,  the  feet  rest  on  pads,  and  the  pro- 
jection of  the  long  talons  pushes  the  feet  in  curves  from  the 
ground. 

It  is  true  that  the  webbed  foot  of  the  wading  bird  lies  flat 
on  the  surface  of  the  ground,  but  never  the  foot  with  the 
talons  and  claws. 

Note  the  fluffiness  of  the  feathers  on  the  thigh  of  the  birds, 
then  the  thick  muscular  skin  of  the  leg  itself  (wrinkled  often 
on  the  forepart).  Try  to  sketch  the  joint,  the  spread  of  each 
toe,  the  curved  talon  and  the  pointed  nail,  with  strength. 
94 


Our  Pets  and  other  Animals 

Do  not  be  fearful  of  exaggerating  muscle.  Mark  the  grip  of 
the  talon  and  the  clutching  strength  of  the  tiny  claw  with 
equal  decision. 

The  wing  of  a  bird  is  sometimes  likened  to  the  arm,  wrist, 
and  thumb  of  the  human  arm.  The  joint  of  the  leg,  which 
has  the  appearance  of  the  human  knee  (bent  backward), 
resembles  the  ankle  of  the  human  being,  for  the  knee-joint  of 
a  bird  is  higher  and  hidden  by  the  plumage. 

No  doubt  you  have  often  remarked  that  the  neck  of  the 
bird  resembles  the  letter  S.  This  is  especially  noticeable  in 
the  swan  when  proudly  '  floating  double '  with  his  neck 
carried  in  beautiful  curves  ;  the  stork  and  the  ibis  elongate 
their  necks — the  S  is  more  drawn  out,  while  in  the  case  of  the 
flamingo,  cassowary,  emu,  and  ostrich  the  neck  more  closely 
resembles  an  interrogation  mark. 

But  we  must  not  linger  too  long  over  details.  We  must 
return  to  a  more  general  survey,  and  we  have  not  yet  touched 
on  the  most  attractive  aspect  of  the  subject — birds  in  flight. 
Here,  indeed,  is  a  fascinating  subject  for  our  pencils. 

How  entrancing  are  the  impetuous  rush  of  the  tiny  body, 
the  fluttering  spread  of  the  buoyant  wings  !  Yet  no  sooner 
do  we  whip  out  a  pencil  than  the  bird  is  gone  beyond 
recall. 

Think  of  the  wonderful  non-resisting  shape  of  the  body 
that  slips  through  the  air  as  a  fish  glides  through  water,  the 
rudder-like  shape  of  the  transparent  tail,  and  the  tremendous 
span  of  the  spread  wings  !  How  often  do  we  draw  wings 
that  would  be  of  no  real  use  to  our  birds  !  The  length  of  the 
wing  outspread  is  prodigious  in  comparison  with  the  size  of 
the  body. 

Observe  the  seagull  with  wings  folded  to  its  side,  and  the 
way  in  which  the  wings  are  incorporated  with  the  slender 
length  of  the  body.  Then  look  closely  at  a  wing  extended, 
note  the  clean-cut  delicacy  of  the  pointed  quills,  the  vigorous 
muscle,  and  the  strength  of  the  shoulder. 

When  we  draw  the  bird  in  flight  we  should  first  sketch  the 
angle  of  the  body,  then  the  angle  of  the  wings. 

95 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

Make  a  rough  cross  indicating  these  angles,  then,  having 
marked  the  tilt  and  swing  of  the  bird,  define  the  shape  of  the 
body,  the  wings,  and  the  tail. 

Whatever  the  position  of  the  bird  on  the  wing  may  be, 
whether  swooping  toward  you  or  flying  away,  whether  the 
wing  be  upraised,  or  down  curving,  you  must  aim  ^rst  at 
getting  the  angles  of  body  and  wings. 

Have  you  ever  seen  a  kestrel  fall  like  a  plummet  from  the 
sky,  and  marked  the  forward  thrust  of  the  head  as  it  hangs 
suspended  ?  Have  you  noticed  the  seagull  whirling  and 
circling,  dipping  first  one  wing  and  then  the  other  in  the 
fringe  of  the  foam  ?  If  so,  you  will  understand  how  neces- 
sary it  is  to  grasp  the  bird's  position  at  a  first  glance. 

Take  up  a  place  of  observation  in  an  open  field,  pencil  in 
hand,  and  make  jottings  of  your  little  feathered  friends.  An 
exasperating  task  I  know  !  But  your  patience  will  be  re- 
warded if  you  can  sketch  the  fluff  of  two  little  folded  wings, 
the  tiny  coiled-up  claw,  the  perk  of  a  glossy  head,  the  saucy 
round  eye  peering  through  the  leaves,  minute  but  invaluable 
fragments. 

We  need  not  go  far  afield  ;  the  ordinary  poultry-yard  will 
afford  plenty  of  interesting  study. 

For  choice  I  should  pitch  on  a  young  cockerel  to  sketch. 
Of  all  restless  creatures  I  would  give  him  the  palm.  But 
wait  until  he  sinks  into  a  dusty  corner  and  his  jewel-gold 
eye  is  closed.  The  shapely  body  and  the  wondrous  com- 
plexity of  head,  beak,  comb,  and  wattles  are  something  at 
which  to  marvel ;  it  is  only  by  the  closest  observation,  by 
utilizing  the  various  suggestions  we  have  already  made,  that 
we  shall  feel  we  are  ready  to  cope  with  the  problems  they 
present. 

First  sketch  your  sparrows,  robins,  owls,  swallows,  and 
tiny  feathered  friends,  later  try  the  more  difficult  subject — 
and  for  all  these  sketches  you  might  well  take  with  you  your 
brush  and  water-colour  box.  Sketch  with  your  brush, 
instead  of  with  your  pencil,  for  a  bird  without  colour  is  most 
strange  and  unnatural. 
96 


Fig  39.  The  Frog 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

From  birds  on  the  wing  we  might  pass  to  the  reptiles  on 
the  ground,  and  those  homely  little  gentlemen  the  toad  and 
frog  are  not  to  be  despised. 

When  drawing  these  small  people  you  must  get  close  to 
their  level.     Try  to  pose  them  on  a  bank  or  raised  surface. 

There  is  something  so  solidly  square  about  the  shape  of  a 
toad  that  it  is  not  surprising  that  it  lends  its  name  to  many 
curiously  shaped  rocks. 

The  European  frog,  shown  in  Fig.  39,  of  glistening  eye  and 
shining  back,  is  more  elegant  in  shape  than  brother  toad ; 
his  toes  are  slimmer,  his  nose  more  pointed. 

Mark  the  upward  tilt  of  the  back,  the  slant  to  the  top  of 
the  head  and  nose,  and  the  long  sweeping  lines  of  the  curiously 
shaped  hind-legs.  Note  the  forward  and  outward  thrust  of 
the  strong  little  elbow,  and  the  bandy-legged  straddle  of  the 
front  limbs. 

Of  all  things  a  frog's  mouth  is  the  most  curious.  Look  at 
the  gape  and  the  length  of  it,  and  the  muscles  which  extend 
from  beyond  the  grin  to  the  eye-cavity,  and  down  again  to 
the  tiniest  dot  of  a  nostril  piercing  the  blunt  nose. 

And  if  you  should  wish  to  portray  the  frog  in  action,  you 
will  be  surprised  at  the  enormous  stretch  of  his  hind-legs,  one 
second  folded  in  a  close  curve  over  the  long-taloned  feet  and 
the  next  opening  in  a  large  sprawling  S  shape. 

From  the  frog  at  the  foot  of  the  tree  we  might  pass  to  the 
sprightly  squirrel  on  the  branch  above,  cracking  nuts  and 
distributing  shells  over  the  heads  of  the  passers-by. 

Squirrels  are  almost  as  difficult  to  study  as  birds.  The 
only  stationary  ones  are  stuffed  and  in  museums,  and  no 
matter  how  beautiful  and  natural  stuffed  things  may  look, 
there  is  always  present  the  fixed  glassy  appearance  that  we 
invariably  exaggerate  when  drawing.  Therefore  draw  in 
museums  only  when  debarred  from  drawing  straight  from 
Nature. 

When  you  are  drawing  a  squirrel  do  not  let  yourself  be 
diverted  by  the  magnificence  of  his  tail  from  more  important 
things.     (Is  he  not  called  Sciurus — '  Shadow-tail '  ?) 
98 


Our  Pets  and  other  Animals 

Begin  by  sketching  the  definite  shapes — the  small  mouse- 
shaped  head,  the  long  curved  back,  the  small  but  strong 
hind-legs  with  which  he  shins  up  the  trees  like  a  flash  of 


Fig.  40.  Rabbits 

lightning;  his  eye — the  dark,  bright  piercing  eye,  set 
diamond-shaped  in  his  head ;  the  small  pointed  nose ;  the 
rounded  curves  of  whiskers ;  the  shapely  ever-moving  ears. 
Note  also  the  dainty  feet  and  paws,  the  delicate  strength 
of  the  claws  and  talons. 

The  squirrel,  together  with  the  mouse  and  rabbit,  form 
<^  3  S  0  I  fe  99 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

part  of  that  large  family  known  as  rodents.  The  word 
'  rodent '  means  '  gnawing.'  This  is  helpful  to  remember 
when  we  are  drawing  these  animals,  for  it  explains  at  once 
the  characteristic  shape  of  the  teeth,  mouth,  and  head. 

When  we  sketch  mice  or  rats  the  long,  narrow,  pointed 
muzzle  and  long,  narrow,  overhanging  teeth  are  very 
noticeable ;  once  we  have  marked  these,  and  added  the 
long  sloping  f^^rehead,  the  small  under-jaw,  the  wide  up- 
standing rounded  ear  and  bright  dark  eye,  we  have  the  main 
characteristics. 

Squirrels  and  rabbits  have  shorter  snouts  and  more  blunted 
muzzles,  but  the  teeth  are  long  and  pointed  ;  this  we  must 
carefully  note  in  our  drawings. 

Rabbits  are  endearing  but  difficult  models,  for  they  seldom 
stay  long  in  one  position  and  are  easily  startled  by  a  sudden 
noise.  Nevertheless,  if  you  sit  by  the  hutch  and  keep  very 
still,  pencil  and  paper  in  hand,  Master  Bunny  will  eventually 
creep  from  his  straw. 

Then  note  the  three-cornered  shape  of  his  head,  with  the 
long  ears  closely  placed  on  the  very  apex,  and  the  beautiful, 
wide-open  eye  with  its  long  lashes.  The  nose,  always  twitch- 
ing, is  blunt  and  short  and  pink,  the  nostril  very  small  but 
of  a  very  decided  shape,  and  the  muzzle  rounded  and  full. 
The  hind-legs  are  of  an  extraordinary  size,  but  gathered 
together  in  a  hunched  position  as  Bunny  sits  in  a  hutch 
nibbling  morsels  of  food  they  are  not  so  noticeable  ;  the  spine 
rises  from  the  head  in  a  long  steep  curve  from  the  neck  to  the 
top  of  the  thighs. 

There  is  nothing  more  soft  and  fluffy  than  the  tail  of  a 
rabbit — '  Cotton-tail,'  as  he  is  called  in  America.  So  soft 
is  it  that  we  must  indicate  it  with  the  most  delicate  touches, 
noticing  the  way  in  which  the  hairs  grow  from  the  root  of  the 
tail  and  spread  outward  and  upward  like  the  down  of  a 
powder-puff. 

By   drawing   our   small  friends,   rabbits,    squirrels,   frogs, 
birds,  and  cats,  we  shall  be  aided  in  attempting,  presently, 
the  more  ambitious  creatures,  dogs,  cows,  bulls,  and  horses. 
100 


Our  Pets  and  other  Animals 

Horses  are  of  all  animals  the  most  difficult  to  draw.  To 
their  exquisite  proportions,  the  wonderful  delicacy  of  their 
slender  limbs,  the  spirited  grace  of  their  beautiful  bodies,  we 
feel,  despairingly,  that  only  a  Rosa  Bonheur,  a  Lucy  Kemp- 
Welch,  or  an  A.  J.  Munnings  can  do  justice. 

Let  us  study  first  the  heavier  breeds,  the  big  dray-horses 
with  their  kindly  frank  faces,  their  great  fetlocks,  their  splendid 
massive  bodies.  These  will  give  fascinating  subjects  which 
need  not  overwhelm  us. 

If  you  have  no  opportunities  of  sketching  the  cart-horse  in 
the  farm-yard,  you  may  possibly  make  a  rapid  sketch  from  a 
window,  or  track  your  subject  down  in  a  side-lane,  as  I  have 
done  in  this  drawing. 

The  positions  of  my  two  cart-horses  are  foreshortened. 
The  long  bodies  are  hidden  by  the  hind-legs,  and  the  finished 
sketch  is  nothing  more  nor  less  than  a  square,  from  the  upper 
part  of  which  extends  the  neck  and  crest  of  the  head. 

As  I  have  said  before,  when  drawing  things  foreshortened, 
sketch  the  nearest  shapes  first,  and  the  receding  shapes  later. 
If  we  mark  the  angle  of  the  flank,  the  angle  of  the  large  bones 
of  the  back  of  the  knee,  the  shaggy  fetlocks,  we  shall  perceive 
that  the  fore -legs — having  the  length  of  body  between — are 
shorter  than  the  hind-legs.     The  body,  too,  dwindles. 

Drawing  the  horse  approaching  toward  us  or  as  seen  side- 
ways, we  must  run  the  eye  from  one  point  to  another. 

Look  at  the  angles  of  the  limbs,  the  '  slew  '  of  the  haunches  ; 
glance  from  knee-cap  to  knee-cap  ;  from  the  massive  deep 
chests  to  the  beautifully  rounded  hindquarters.  Note  how 
the  curves  and  muscles  of  the  arched  neck  compare  with  the 
muscles  and  curves  of  the  thigh,  and  the  silky  thick  flow  of 
the  mane  with  the  long  wavy  ripples  of  the  tail  and  the  shaggy 
clustering  of  hair  round  the  fetlocks. 

Try  to  make  separate  studies  of  the  separate  parts  of  the 
body,  head,  and  legs.  When  you  are  sketching  the  head  in 
profile  remark  the  great  length  of  it  (the  skull  of  a  horse  is 
an  amazing  size,  almost  as  long  as  the  body  of  a  human  being), 
then  mark  the  greatest  depth  from  the  eyebrow  to  the  outline 

101 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

of  the  bones  of  the  cheek,  trace  the  long  nose,  the  rounded 
nostril,  and  the  curve  of  the  soft  mouth,  the  lips,  and  the 
swelling  curves  beneath  the  under  lip,  then  reproduce  the 
softer  portions,  until  you  reach  the  cheekbone  again.  Mark 
the  position  of  the  beautifully  shaped  ears,  and  drop  a  line 
from  the  ear-socket  to  the  socket  of  the  eye,  checking  this 
position  with  that  of  the  brow  and  cheek.  Get  the  angle  of 
the  eye,  the  lid,  the  shape  of  the  beautiful  eye  itself ;  then 
give  attention  to  the  nostril,  which  we  are  apt  to  inflate  too 
much  in  our  drawings.  Notice  the  softness  of  the  muzzle 
and  the  shape  of  the  nostril,  and  the  way  in  which  the  fore- 
part tucks  behind  the  sides. 

Having  sketched  the  main  features,  you  can  revel  in  the 
drawing  of  the  different  textures,  the  luminosity  of  the  eyes, 
the  soft  delicacy  of  ear,  nostril,  mouth,  and  muzzle,  the 
muscles  and  veins  seen  beneath  the  skin,  the  forelock,  and  the 
rippling  waves  of  the  mane. 

Take  a  full  brush  of  colour  and,  wiping  it  to  a  point,  try 
to  sketch  a  pony  galloping,  a  horse  rearing  over  a  fence,  or 
cantering  across  a  grassy  meadow.  You  can  do  much  interest- 
ing work  by  your  remembrance  of  horses  in  action.  Obviously 
you  cannot  draw  a  horse  in  action  from  anything  but  close 
observation  wedded  to  memory. 

Study,  too,  pictures  of  horses.  Look  well  at  photographs 
in  the  newspapers,  and  copy  those  with  the  brush,  remember- 
ing always  the  one  great  handicap  of  the  camera,  that  the 
near  things  are  distorted  and  made  to  appear  too  large. 
(This  fact  you  have  doubtless  proved  often  for  yourself  when 
photographed  with  your  feet  crossed  and  pointing  at  the 
camera,  giving  the  astounding  impression  that  you  have  the 
proportions  of  a  well-nourished  giant.) 

And  behold  !  we  have  travelled  all  this  way  with  but  a 
passing  glimpse  at  our  most  favoured  pet — the  dog  !  The 
study  of  dogs  is  a  whole  world  in  itself,  from  the  tiny  shiver- 
ing black  toy  terrier  to  the  magnificent  English  mastiff. 

Sketches  of  dogs  are  inclined  to  be  scrappy,  as  indeed  are 
all  the  sketches  of  our  active  little  friends.  But  first  we 
102 


Fis.  42.    Dogs 


102 


Our  Pets  and  other  Animals 

must  decide  in  our  minds  the  chief  characteristics  of  our 
models. 

What  with  the  distorted  short  legs  and  long  body  of  the 
dachshund,  the  length  and  grace  of  the  deerhound,  the 
stocky  sturdy  build  of  the  wire-haired  terrier,  the  prodigious 
muscle  and  width  of  the  bulldog's  body,  we  have  ample 
variety. 

We  must  bear  in  mind  the  general  build  of  the  dog.  If 
not,  we  are  apt  to  give  the  Cairn  legs  as  long  as  the  pug,  the 
schipperke  ears  as  starkly  pointed  as  those  of  the  Alsatian 
wolfhound.  It  is  easier,  of  course,  to  draw  the  breeds  that 
have  short  and  silky  hair  than  those  that  are  clothed  in 
long  plumes  of  fur,  for  then  we  can  see  the  shape  of 
their  limbs,  the  symmetry  of  their  bodies.  A  bull-terrier  is 
easier  to  draw  than  a  sky-terrier,  a  greyhound  easier  than 
a  borzoi. 

Here  we  have  the  head  of  Benjamin  (an  old  English  terrier) 
with  ear  cocked  and  eye  alert. 

Observe  first  the  long  barrel  shape  of  the  head,  then  the 
blunt  muzzle  and  the  rounded  nostril.  Having  marked  the 
position  and  angle  of  the  head,  we  can  next  note  the  breadth 
and  slope  of  the  round  forehead,  the  angle  of  the  eye,  the 
position  of  the  far  eye  (indicated  and  accentuated  by  an  eye- 
lash), and  the  curve  of  the  muzzle. 

The  mouth  is  partially  hidden  by  the  soft  white  hair  (and 
there  is  nothing  softer  in  Nature  than  the  mouth  of  an  animal). 
Look  carefully  at  the  receding — slightly  receding — nose  and 
jaw.  The  protruding  under-jaw  gives  at  once  the  suggestion 
of  the  bulldog  strain.  The  massive,  protuberant  under-jaw 
is  characteristic  of  that  breed. 

Ben  has  a  full  eloquent  eye.  The  overhanging  triangular 
flap  of  the  ear  lends  a  sharp  and  useful  accent  to  the  rounded 
shape  behind  the  eye,  and  behind  that  we  can  perceive  the 
full  lobe  and  root  of  the  ear. 

Sambo  (Fig.  42),  mystified  by  a  frog,  is  yapping  away  in  a 
crouching  but  vigorous  position — in  which  you  may  be  sure 
he  did  not  remain  very  long ;  hence  the  absence  of  the  other 

103 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

two  legs.     (But  this  is  the  way  I  wish  you  to  tackle  your 
doggie  friends.     Dash  at  any  position,  even  if  it  is  fleeting.) 

Sambo's  body  is  somewhat  contracted,  and  so  is  his  neck. 
Roughly,  he  represents  a  triangular  shape,  as  shown.  The 
big  muscles  have  fair  play  ;  the  thin  flank  of  the  hind-leg 
and  the  shoulder-bone  of  the  fore-leg  are  very  noticeable. 
Also  the  shadows  behind  the  upper  part  of  the  front  leg  and 
back  leg  force  the  rounded  shape  of  the  ribs. 

Next  comes  beautiful  Bracken  (so  named  because  of  her 
glorious  golden-brown  and  red  coat).  Her  back  is  curved 
and  her  fore-legs  coiled  ;  on  these  rest  her  muzzle,  now,  alas  ! 
growing  grey.  The  position  suggests  a  perfect  curve — out  of 
which  trails  the  long  tail  and  left  leg.  Aim  first  at  sketching 
the  large  coil  of  the  big  body,  then  the  flat  angle  of  the  hind- 
leg,  and  the  fullness  of  the  trunk.  The  extended  leg  pushes 
up  the  position  of  the  left  shoulder-blade  ;  also  we  can  see 
the  inner  line  of  the  neck.  Between  these  two  shapes  trace 
the  curve  of  the  neck  itself  and  the  triangular  shape  of 
the  head,  and  the  soft  flat  line  of  the  chest  against  the 
ground. 

We  should  now  examine  the  curious  curve  of  the  hind-leg 
and  the  way  in  which  the  muscles  and  sinews  draw  back,  also 
the  shape  of  the  bone  as  it  touches  on  the  ground,  and  the 
great  paw  as  it  comes  forward  and  lies  limply  at  rest. 

How  different  is  Bracken's  ear  from  Ben's — long,  soft, 
pendulous  !  And  the  brow  is  more  benevolent  and  more 
deeply  indented  between  the  soft  brown  eyes. 

A  word  of  warning  about  muscular  creatures  at  rest. 
When  muscles  are  lax  and  sinews  free  from  strain  we  are 
inclined  (in  our  drawings)  to  forget  them  altogether,  and  a 
finely  built  dog  sleeping  will  look,  if  we  are  not  careful,  far 
too  limp  and  flabby  a  creature.  We  must  always  remember 
the  muscles  ;  note  and  draw  them  carefully,  they  will  keep 
our  drawings  up  to  pitch. 

Dogs  leaping  and  jumping,  dogs  running — the  jog-trot  of 
the  terrier,  and  the  easy  gallop  of  the  deerhound — here  are 
interesting  subjects  for  your  pencil  and  brush. 
104 


Our  Pets  and  other  Animals 

We  might  take  up  a  brush  fairly  full  of  paint  and  sketch 
a  little  fresco  of  dogs  in  action.  I  say  advisedly  '  brush.' 
We  can't  stipple  with  a  full  brush.  We  must  make  up  our 
minds,  and  draw,  without  hesitation,  the  thin  or  plump  body, 
the  long  or  thick  legs,  the  short  or  pointed  nose,  the  flowing 
or  stunted  tail.  The  fresco  may  not  be  very  true  to  Nature, 
but  it  will  certainly  teach  us  a  good  deal. 


105 


CHAPTER  X 

Colour^  and  how  to  Find  it 

COLOUR  is  the  most  deceptive  thing  under  the  sun. 
No  two  people  see  colour  in  exactly  the  same  way, 
no  two  people  reproduce — or  paint — colour  with  ex- 
actly the  same  blending  of  tints. 

If  a  colour-group  is  placed  before  several  young  artists 
with  paint-boxes  in  their  hands,  we  shall  not  find — providing, 
of  course,  that  they  are  not  copying  each  other — the  artists 
choosing  the  same  tints  wherewith  to  paint  the  same  objects. 
In  all  probability  every  painting  would  be  quite  different. 
Which  proves  that  colour  appeals  to  all  of  us  in  varied  degrees. 

Painting  is  not  a  mere  matching  of  tints,  or  placing  one 
tint  against  another  tint. 

We  might  begin  our  picture  with  a  conscientious  desire  to 
match  every  colour  exactly  and  yet  produce  something 
horribly  wrong.  Because  we  began  with  a  wrong  idea  in  our 
head.     We  started  from  an  entirely  false  basis. 

We  must  not  begin  by  asking  ourselves,  "  Is  that  an  orange, 
blue,  or  green  tint  ?  "  but,  "  What  is  the  colour  that  pervades 
and  envelops  the  whole  ?  " 

Have  you  ever  walked  in  the  meadows  or  down  a  street  in 
a  city  and  remarked  to  yourself  how  different  everything 
looked  when  last  you  were  there  ? 

Perhaps  it  was  then  a  brilliantly  sunny  day,  and  on  the 
day  on  which  you  made  the  remark  the  same  street  was 
dripping  and  shining  from  recent  rain-storms.  It  would 
indeed  be  different.  Then  the  sun  filled  every  chink  and 
shadow  with  golden  warmth.  It  played  on  the  fronts  of  the 
houses,  it  sparkled  on  the  window-frames,  it  picked  out  the 
red  flush  of  the  bricks,  it  spied  the  orange  peel  in  the  gutter, 
106 


Colour^  and  how  to  Find  it 

the  jewels  of  a  lady  walking  along  the  street.  It  was  a  gay 
scene,  beneath  sunny  blue  skies  dashed  with  warm  clouds. 
And  the  charm  of  the  country  scene  would  be  even  more 
intensified  by  the  brilliancy  of  the  clear  air  and  bright  sun, 
which  emphasizes  the  lichen  on  the  cottage-roof  and  walls, 
the  yellow  in  the  old  flagstones,  the  gleaming  of  the  ricks, 
the  rich  shadows  flung  by  the  soft  green  foliage  of  the  tall 
trees. 

Then — the  next  time  ! 

Heavy  rains  swept  the  streets  or  drenched  the  meadows, 
clouds  hung  dark  and  threatening,  pavements  gleamed 
coldly,  the  muddy  lanes  were  glittering,  heavy  foliage  drip- 
ping, thick  soft  mists  arising,  all  was  wet,  grey,  and  cold. 
There  were  dull  shadows  where  the  people  walked  the  streets, 
the  tops  of  the  houses  were  shrouded  in  murky  fog,  and  in 
the  country  lanes  the  cows  moved  between  the  heavy  hedges 
wrapped  in  a  moist  cold  air. 

Do  you  realize  that  there  must  always  be  one  general  hue 
that  envelops,  and  blends,  and  harmonizes  ? 

Have  not  you  sometimes  said  of  a  painting,  "  I  don't  know 
what  is  the  matter  with  that  picture  .  .  .  but  I  don't  like  it  "  ? 
You  have  a  very  definite  reason,  but  you  cannot  put  it  in 
words.  You  don't  like  it,  and  if  you  lived  to  be  a  hundred 
you  feel  you  would  never  like  it  more  or  hate  it  less.  In 
other  words,  you  feel  there  is  something  that  jars  upon  you. 
If  we  tried  to  analyse  your  feelings  about  that  picture,  we 
should  probably  discover  that  a  crash  of  discords  upon  the 
piano  bore  a  strong  resemblance  to  the  jarring  colours  of  the 
picture. 

The  man  who  painted  the  picture  did  not  try  to  discover 
the  general  colour  that  ran  through  his  picture,  and  blend 
it  harmoniously  together ;  but,  like  a  simultaneous  crash  of 
all  the  notes  on  the  piano,  he  banged  every  tint  thick  and  fast 
upon  his  canvas. 

On  certain  islands  in  the  South  Seas  the  native  mothers  fill 
hollowed-out  trunks  of  trees  with  water  and  in  this  water 
boldly  place  their  infants,  and  the  babies  swim. 

107 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

From  this  example  some  people  argue  that  all  babies  will 
swim  as  naturally  as  they  will  later  walk  and  talk. 

On  that  particular  point  I  am  not  prepared  to  give  an 
opinion,  but  this  I  do  know,  for  it  has  been  often  proved  :  if 
we  put  a  box  of  chalks  into  the  hands  of  a  small  child  of  four 
or  five,  the  child  will  as  often  as  not  use  the  colours  rightly 
and  naturally.  I  have  seen  paintings  by  tiny  children  as  good 
as  any  done  by  practised  artists.  Give  the  child  a  string 
of  beads,  a  coloured  ball,  a  bunch  of  cherries,  or  a  twisted 
morsel  of  coloured  thread,  and  Baby  will  chalk  these  colours 
with  astonishing  ease.  The  shape  may  be  funny,  but  the 
colour  will  be  pure,  fresh,  and  sweet.  Which  proves  that  the 
sense  of  colour  is  a  natural  sense. 

It  is  a  very  stimulating  thought  that  we  are  born  with  this 
delightful  gift,  which  only  needs  a  natural  development. 

As  we  grow  older,  and  more  diffident  of  ourselves,  we  seek 
out  rules  and  hamper  ourselves  with  stupid  regulations.  But 
if  we  merely  ask  ourselves  a  few  simple  guiding  questions, 
such  as,  "  What  is  the  general  colour  of  the  thing  that  I  wish 
to  paint  ?  "  and  keep  our  mind  focused  on  that  one  thing, 
our  troubles  will  melt  away. 

Each  colour  depends  to  a  great  extent  on  its  surroundings. 

There's  Timmy,  the  tabby  cat,  for  instance.  What  colour 
would  you  call  his  coat  and  eyes  ?  "A  buff  fur  striped  with 
sharp  black  lines,  and  yellow  eyes,"  you  would  most  probably 
reply. 

But  look  at  Timmy  lying  on  the  summer  grass.  His  buff 
and  white  fur  reflects  the  green  of  the  grass  ;  his  glossy  black 
stripes  fade  in  the  sun  like  old  silver,  and  deepen  in  shadow 
like  the  rich  dark  colour  of  the  tree-bark ;  his  eyes,  most 
curious  of  all,  empty  into  round  pools  of  colourless  light. 
Thinking  of  Timmy's  colouring  suggests  another  subject  on 
which  we  have  not  time  to  dwell — the  protective  nature  of 
colour.  It  also  reminds  us  that  colour  is  influenced  by  other 
surrounding  colours. 

"  What  is  colour  ?  "  cries  the  young  artist. 

We  say  that  black  is  black  and  white  is  white,  that  snow  is 
108 


Colour^  and  how  to  Find  it 

white,  the  clean  Hnen  handkerchief  is  white,  the  ermine  fur 
that  you  wear  round  your  neck  is  white.  Drop  your  hand- 
kerchief upon  the  snow,  lay  your  ermine  on  its  unbroken 
surface,  the  one  will  look  murky  and  grey  and  the  other 
yellow. 

Black  is  just  black,  you  say.  But  is  it  ?  Objects  are  black 
because  they  come  in  contrast  with  other  colours. 

Search  about  for  black  things  in  the  room.  You  will  see 
that  there  are  as  many  shades  in  black  as  there  are  in  other 
tints,  according  to  the  light  in  which  the  black  object  is 
placed,  and  also  according  to  the  colours  with  which  it  is 
surrounded. 

Look  at  the  black  coat  of  a  man  in  a  subdued  light,  when, 
for  instance,  he  is  sitting  in  a  room  ;  and  look  at  the  same 
black  coat  when  the  man  is  walking  out  in  the  streets  under 
the  blue  sky. 

The  black  coat  under  a  subdued  quiet  light  is  deep  and  rich 
and  warm,  but  in  the  open  air  the  light  strikes  on  the  shoulders, 
the  arms,  and  the  skirts  of  the  coat,  and  if  a  cold  blue  light  is 
reflected  from  the  sky,  then  the  black  coat  will  reflect  that 
colour  and  tint.  Obviously,  being  a  dark  material,  it  will 
absorb  ;  but  light  and  shade  there  must  be,  and  the  black 
will  mingle  with  the  general  colouring  of  the  street. 

'  A  sense  of  colour '  in  the  mind  of  an  artist  is  simply  the 
faculty  of  choosing  tints. 

One  artist  may  revel  in  exquisite  golds,  reds,  and  blues  ; 
another  may  prefer  silvery  greys  and  blues,  warm  fawn,  and 
dull  reds.  But  it  is  not  true  to  say  that  the  latter  has  not 
as  much  sense  of  colour  as  the  former.  His  choice  of  tints  is 
different.  He  sees  Nature  in  more  subdued  hues.  That  is 
all.     His  theme  of  colouring  is  quieter,  more  subtle. 

If  your  taste  inclines  to  more  delicate  shades,  do  not  be 
discouraged  because  by  that  choice  you  are  told  you  haven't 
much  sense  of  colour.  That  you  know  in  your  heart  of 
hearts  is  not  true.  The  beauty  of  twilight,  or  the  delicacy 
of  a  misty  landscape,  or  the  sombreness  of  the  grey  old 
woman  in  her  dark  frock  have  fully  as  much  '  colour '  as 

109 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

the  gorgeous  sunset,  or  the  meadows  rioting  with  gold  and 
crimson  blossoms. 

It  is  worse  than  useless  to  plaster  your  picture  with  brilliant 
reds,  yellows,  and  blues  because  you  think  by  so  doing  you 
display  a  fine  sense  of  colour. 

It  is  perfectly  true  that  we  must  use  the  colours  as  fully 
as  we  feel  justified.     But  we  must  feel  justified. 

The  great  colourists  of  old  used  their  crimsons,  and  golds, 
and  blues,  and  purples  lavishly,  they  revelled  in  rich  silks 
and  brocades,  in  brilliant  skies  ;  in  short,  in  the  dazzling 
mixture  of  many  tints.  Out  of  these  gay  scenes  of  streets, 
piazzas,  palaces,  and  market-squares  floated  the  brilliant 
colours,  blended  and  made  harmonious  by  the  dazzling  light 
of  the  sun. 

Nature  always  harmonizes,  and  blends  tints  unerringly. 

When  we  with  our  miserable  little  colour-boxes  would 
paint  crude  tints.  Nature  takes  us  by  the  hand  and  shows 
where  we  go  wrong. 

Imagine  a  subject  composed  of  nothing  but  clashing  colours. 
Could  anything,  we  ask  ourselves,  right  that  wrong  ? 

Once  I  saw  a  girl  standing  in  a  field  not  far  outside  the  city 
of  Madrid.  She  wore  a  purple  handkerchief  on  her  head,  a 
crimson  and  purple  skirt  looped  over  her  petticoat.  She  had 
in  her  arms  a  huge  sheath  of  blue  cornflowers  and  she  stood 
knee-deep  in  scarlet  poppies.  Not  one  red  agreed  with 
another  red,  the  purples  were  vivid,  and  the  blue  was  crude. 
Yet  the  whole  scene  was  pleasing  because  it  was  bathed  in  a 
brilliantly  clear  air.  The  purity  of  the  atmosphere  made  all 
the  crude  tints  harmonize. 

Painting  does  not  mean  placing  all  the  paints  upon  a  sheet 
of  paper.     That  any  foolish  person  can  do. 

But  painting  is  selecting  the  right  tints,  and  playing  our 
tunes  with  those  tints  harmoniously. 

Suppose  we  take  a  simple  object,  a  small  Flanders  poppy, 
scarlet  hued,  with  folded  petals  of  silk,  and  look  at  that  with 
a  view  to  painting  it. 

Then  we  will  ask  ourselves,  "  What  is  the  colour  that  flows 
110 


Fi^f.    43.      {a)    Ax  AltTIKICI.U,    r..ii   i    :     im.>\     M    -mm,   ,,,.    xm,    mow 

IT  sHul'LIi  Xo|-  KK  PAINTED,      {b)    Two  CiiUlin;  SCHEMES, 

AND  Fllisl'  iMl'llKSSKtXs  (iF  linTlI 


Colour^  and  how  to  Find  it 

through  the  poppy-blossom,  stem,  and  leaf  ?  "  The  poppy 
is  composed  of  red  and  green  tints,  and  yellow  there  is  in 
both  red  and  green.  Therefore,  if  we  wish  to  paint  the 
poppy,  and  we  are  of  course  drawing  with  the  brush  and  with 
colour,  we  could  safely  decide  to  sketch  it  in  a  pale  yellow 
tint. 

On  painting  the  scarlet  petal  the  yellow  will  melt  and 
become  one  with  the  red,  and  again  on  painting  the  stem  and 
leaf  the  green  will  absorb  the  yellow. 

If  we  had  not  taken  the  precaution  to  ask  ourselves  that 
question  and  had  simply  sketched  the  poppy  in  any  tint,  say 
Prussian  blue,  then  the  result  would  have  been  a  dirty  cold 
blue  creeping  into  the  purity  of  the  scarlet  and  destroying 
the  vivid  glow. 

Or,  if  we  had  waited  for  the  blue  to  dry  before  applying 
the  red,  we  should  not  have  improved  matters.  Our  poppy 
would  have  had  a  harsh  blue  outline,  and  who  ever  saw  a 
poppy  so  decorated,  except  on  a  china  plate  or  on  an  old  tin 
mug  ? 

Possibly  you  might  argue  that  the  subject  is  a  simple  one 
for  the  brush,  that  the  problem  will  be  very  different  when 
more  complicated  subjects  are  attempted. 

Gather  together  several  colour-groups  and  test  the  problem 
of  colour  for  yourself — a  stick  of  asparagus,  a  leaf  of  rhubarb, 
apples  on  a  dull  painted  platter,  a  sprig  of  honesty,  or  a  spray 
of  Ted  or  yellow  (single)  chrysanthemums  in  a  copper-coloured 
vase,  a  coloured  straw  hat  decorated  with  a  prettily  shaded 
scarf,  a  Japanese  lantern,  lighted,  and  a  few  objects  placed 
around  it.  And,  having  settled  upon  one  of  these  subjects, 
ask  yourself  the  same  question  :  "  What  is  the  general  colour 
of  the  subject  ?  "  Is  it  cold  ?  Is  it  warm  ?  Does  a  yellow 
tinge  prevail,  or  a  cool  grey-blue  ?  Has  it  a  flush  of  red,  or 
is  it  suffused  with  pale  pearly  tints  ? 

When  you  are  painting  groups  it  is  just  as  well  to  place 
them  before  a  plain  background,  a  wall-space,  or  an  angle 
formed  of  two  plain  boards  of  wood  joined  together,  thus 
concentrating  light  and  shade  and  preventing  your  attention 

111 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

from  being  distracted  by  movement  in  the  background. 
Backgrounds  should  be  plainly  tinted.  Some  neutral  tint 
(neutral  meaning  '  neither  '  in  the  sense  that  it  belongs  to  no 
very  definite  colour),  fawn,  buff,  or  grey.  Then  your  colour- 
group  will  have  every  chance  of  asserting  itself. 

When  using  water-colour  always  work  from  light  to  dark. 
That  is,  sketch  your  painting  with  a  light  colour.  If  you 
sketch  it  with  a  dark  tint,  then  that  tint  will  either  run,  and 
spoil  your  delicate  tints,  or  else  it  will  outline  the  edges  with 
a  harsh  dark  tint  like  the  edges  of  clouds  in  a  stormy  sky. 

Also  avoid  '  body  colour ' — or  flake  white.  White  paint 
is  thick  and  opaque.  Once  white  paint  enters  our  painting, 
there  it  must  continue.  We  cannot  make  dabs  of  white  paint 
without  a  patchy  effect.  White  gives  a  different  texture, 
and,  being  thick,  takes  away  all  clearness  and  sparkle,  all 
richness  and  depth. 

A  common  fault  into  which  young  artists  often  fall  is  to 
paint  the  white  clouds  in  a  landscape  with  white  paint.  But 
the  delicate  colouring  of  the  clouds  should  be  sketched  with 
the  faintest  tint  (the  prevailing  tint  of  the  landscape),  and  the 
white  paper  left  to  give  the  effect  of  the  white  clouds. 

Never  be  afraid  of  using  pure  colour.  To  enrich  or  deepen 
shadows,  to  sharpen  high  lights,  to  lend  sparkle  or  brightness, 
place  the  pure  tint  straight  on  the  paper  without  mixing  or 
putting  it  first  on  the  palette. 

To  soften  and  blend  your  tints  take  a  full  brush  and  flood 
the  water  on  the  paper  and  let  the  colours  mingle  on  the 
paper. 

Should  you  have  an  unpleasingly  harsh  effect,  do  not 
tinker  at  your  painting.  Let  it  dry.  When  it  is  quite  hard 
and  bone-dry  take  a  brushful  of  clear  water  and  pass  it  over 
your  drawing,  and  work  on  the  drawing  when  it  is  moist. 

Small  children  find  it  amusing  and  instructive  to  map 
out  discs  or  squares  and  fill  these  spaces  with  colours.  By 
blending,  mixing,  and  playing  with  a  few  tints  you  realize 
the  immense  variations  that  can  be  obtained  by  judicious 
handling. 
112 


Colour^  and  how  to  Find  it 

A  few  petals  plucked  from  a  brilliantly  coloured  flower  (a 
geranium,  say)  will  give  one's  colour-box  a  great  stimulus. 
Try  to  paint  the  petal ;  paint  a  number  of  petals,  and  notice 
their  dazzling  tints. 

For  purity,  depth,  richness  of  tint,  the  breast  feathers  of 
a  brilliantly  coloured  bird  (parrot,  macaw,  or  parakeet)  are 
perhaps  unrivalled.  Lay  one  down  on  a  small  sheet  of  white 
paper — an  envelope — and  try  to  paint  the  shape  and  tint. 
Try  also  to  mix  the  tint  and  lay  it  on  the  paper  with  the 
burst  of  freshness  that  is  the  chief  charm  of  the  feather.  Fill 
your  brush  generously  full,  and  apply  it  quickly,  lightly  but 
firmly.  When  it  is  drying  define  (or  draw)  with  a  few  sharp 
shadows  and  strokes  the  tiny  stem,  the  fluff  about  the  stem, 
the  broad  vane. 

Leaves,  too,  lend  a  delightful  variety,  leaves  with  their 
gorgeous  autumn  raiment.  Small  children  revel  in  painting 
their  varied  tints  and  shapes.  Nature  is  very  lavish  with  her 
bright  colours  and  she  uses  the  widest  range  of  tints. 

Again  I  must  insist,  at  the  risk  of  appearing  wearisome — 
bear  always  in  mind  the  general  colour  of  the  object.  Which 
rule  applies  with  equal  force  to  a  lemon  or  a  landscape. 

Of  course  you  will  make  mistakes.  We  all  do  that.  You 
may  begin  your  drawing  as  a  cold  scheme  of  colour  when  it 
should  be  warm,  or  vice  versa.  It  is  quite  possible  that  you 
may  veer  round  and  find  yourself  finishing  in  direct  opposition 
to  your  starting-point;  in  which  case  your  picture  will  be 
far  from  successful. 

If  you  are  painting  from  Nature  and  out  of  doors,  you  may 
be  betrayed  by  Nature  herself,  for  the  weather  has  a  habit 
of  changing  suddenly  and  so  complicating  matters. 

But  provided  you  do  make  up  your  mind  and  nothing 
prevents  you  from  persevering  in  your  choice,  you  will  have 
accomplished  something  pleasing  because  you  will  have 
achieved  a  pure  harmony  in  colour. 


118 


CHAPTER  XI 

Measuring  and  Perspective 

THERE  is  no  general  way  of  doing  things,"  says  a 
great  writer  on  art.  "  No  recipe  can  be  given  for 
doing  as  much  as  the  drawing  of  a  bunch  of  grapes." 

If  there  are  no  known  recipes  for  drawing  things  success- 
fully, there  are,  nevertheless,  several  methods  by  which  the 
young  artist  is  helped  out  of  difficulties  and  started  on  the 
right  path. 

The  application  of  a  few  rules  of  perspective,  the  use  of 
plumb  and  parallel  lines,  the  measurement  and  comparison 
of  one  part  of  a  drawing  with  another  part — all  these  things 
contribute  toward  the  training  of  the  eye  and  the  quickening 
of  the  brain. 

Provided  that  you  honestly  desire  advice,  there  is  nothing 
to  be  ascertained  but  the  direction  in  which  that  advice 
should  be  followed. 

In  short,  what  do  you  wish  to  know  ?  What  is  the  special 
difficulty  that  perplexes  your  mind  ?  Does  your  drawing 
look  out  of  proportion  ?  Is  it  too  bulky  for  its  height,  too 
short,  too  thin,  or  too  tall  ? 

Then  we  will  measure  one  part  against  another  part. 

Perhaps  it  seems  to  you  that  the  object  or  objects  in  your 
drawing  are  falling  forward  or  inclining  backward. 

Then  we  will  apply  a  plumb-line. 

If  you  have  embarked  on  an  ambitious  subject  such  as  the 
drawing  of  a  house,  or  a  street,  and  you  cannot  '  make  it 
look  right ' — "  It  won't  go  back,"  or  (equally  possible)  "  It 
won't  come  forward  " — then  we  must  delve  into  the  mysteries 
of  perspective  and  apply  common  sense  and  plain  argument. 

Perspective  is  sometimes  called  the  grammar  of  art  because 
114 


Measuring  and  Perspective 

it  assists  us  to  draw  correctly,  as  the  grammar  of  a  language 
helps  us  to  speak  and  write  correctly. 

In  the  first  place  let  us  consider  proportions. 

If  you  are  sitting  at  your  work,  lean  back  in  your  chair  and 
face  the  object  that  you  are  drawing,  and  hold  a  pencil  or  ruler 


loitfr        * 

Pencil 


Fig.  44 


up  at  arm's  length  and  level  with  your  eyes.  Close  one  eye 
and  measure  from  one  end  of  the  ruler,  or  pencil,  to  the  thumb, 
then  swing  the  hand — still  at  arm's  length — and  compare 
the  measurement  with  another  portion  of  the  same  object. 

Look  at  your  drawing. 

Compare  the  same  proportions  in  your  drawing.  The  pro- 
portions must  agree. 

Let  us  presume  that  you  are  drawing  a  simple  subject  such 
as  a  small  basket  and  you  are  in  doubt  as  to  whether  the 
depth  of  your  drawing  of  the  basket  is  too  great  for  its  width, 

115 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

Hold  your  pencil  at  arm's  length  and  mark  the  depth  with 
your  thumb.  Swivel  your  wrist,  keeping  your  thumb  in  the 
same  position  on  the  pei;icil,  and  place  it  in  mid-air  on  the 
outside  edge  of  the  basket,  measuring  the  width  and  counting  : 
"  once,"  then  shifting,  "  twice,"  again  shifting,  "  thrice  " 
(probably  not  quite  three  times). 

Drop  your  arm  and  look  at  your  drawing. 

Measure  the  depth  of  the  basket  itself  with  your  finger 
and  thumb  on  your  pencil  and  place  the  measurement  against 
the  width. 

In  that  manner  you  can  prove  for  yourself  whether  the 
proportions  of  your  drawing  are  right  or  wrong. 

The  reason  why  we  close  one  eye  and  extend  the  arm  is 
this.  By  closing  one  eye  we  concentrate  our  vision.  We 
see  one  object,  minus  all  its  distracting  surroundings.  When 
the  elbow  is  straight  the  arm  is  extended  at  its  greatest 
length.  Without  taking  this  precaution  we  might  cheat 
ourselves  and  unconsciously  alter  the  position  of  the  hand, 
and  confuse  measurements. 

By  straightening  the  elbow  we  keep  the  hand  at  the  same 
distance  for  all  measurements. 

Do  not  make  a  fetish  of  measuring.  Use  it  merely  as  a 
check,  as  a  corrective.  Draw  first,  measure  afterward.  The 
obnoxious  habit  of  measuring  first,  and  ticking  off  the 
measurement  on  the  paper,  is  a  trick  unworthy  of  an  artist. 
Moreover,  it  is  a  trap.  The  more  we  measure  the  less  we 
prove.  It  is  quite  possible  to  measure  until  we  stupefy  our- 
selves. 

If  you  are  in  doubt — measure. 

Ask  yourself,  "  Have  I  made  the  nose  too  short  ?  "  Take 
a  measurement  of  the  nose  and  compare  it  with  the  length  of 
the  face.  "  Have  I  drawn  the  house  too  tall  in  comparison 
with  the  poplar- tree,  or  the  fence  too  high  for  the  barn  ?  " 
Measure  the  house  against  the  tree,  or  the  height  of  the  fence 
against  the  height  of  the  barn. 

Possibly  the  proportions  of  the  house,  tree,  fence,  or  barn 
are  fairly  satisfactory,  but  you  are  not  quite  satisfied  with 
116 


Measuring  and  Perspective 

the  lines  that  run  parallel  with  your  eyes,  the  top  of  the  roof, 
the  top  of  the  wall. 

Then  put  up  your  pencil  or  ruler,  holding  it  at  one  end  and 


Fig.  45 

parallel  with  your  eye,  and  at  arm's  length.  Close  one  eye. 
Raise  or  lower  it  until  the  roof  or  wall  is  almost  but  not  quite 
covered.  The  pencil  or  ruler  has  a  smooth  unbroken  edge,  and 
every  divergence  from  the  straight  line  will  be  apparent. 

117 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

Parallel  lines  of  roof,  wall,  box,  or  house  can  thus  be 
easily  corrected.  But  what  of  the  upright  lines — the 
lintel  of  the  door,  the  frame  of  a  window,  the  sides  of  a 
wall  ?  How  shall  we  prove  whether  we  have  drawn  these 
correctly  ? 

Take  a  piece  of  thick  silk  or  cotton,  preferably  of  a  dark 
tint,  and  weighted  with  a  lump  of  lead  (or  some  similar 
heavy  substance),  and  you  have  one  of  man's  oldest  tools,  the 
plumb-line. 

Hold  this  at  arm's  length  and  between  the  finger  and  thumb 
and  before  the  object  of  your  drawing. 

The  plumb-line  will  prove  whether  the  door  or  window  is 
perfectly  upright  (or  perpendicular).  Pull  your  drawing- 
block,  or  drawing-board,  forward  and  let  the  plumb-line  hang 
before  the  doubtful  line  of  your  sketch.  The  plumb-line 
always  finds  the  true  perpendicular. 

When,  however,  you  are  drawing  complicated  subjects  such 
as  a  large  box,  pieces  of  furniture,  a  portion  of  a  room,  house, 
or  a  street,  you  are  faced  with  greater  difficulties. 

"  How  are  things  in  a  drawing  made  to  go  back  ?  "  is  a 
question  that  requires  a  little  more  elucidation. 

Probably  as  a  small  child  you  began  to  appreciate  that  as 
objects  retire  or  recede,  so  must  they  become  apparently 
smaller — a  first  rule  of  perspective. 

Did  you  not  sometimes  play  at  the  game  of  hiding  from 
your  sight  a  house  or  a  tree  by  putting  your  fmger,  or  even  a 
single  hair,  close  to  your  eye  ? 

You  must  have  noticed  that  the  boat  becomes  smaller  and 
smaller  as  it  nears  the  horizon ;  that  a  man  climbing  a  distant 
hill  or  mountain  is  reduced  eventually  to  a  mere  speck  ;  that 
a  huge  aeroplane  looks  no  larger  than  a  tiny  fly  among  the 
clouds  ? 

Therefore  you  have  fully  convinced  yourself  that  objects 
must  become  smaller  as  they  recede. 

In  other  words,  as  objects  retire,  or  are  farther  from  the  eye, 
they  occupy  less  space  upon  the  field  of  vision. 

The  objects  in  the  nearest  part  of  your  picture — that  is 
118 


Fig.  46.   Objects  become  Smaller  as  they  Recede 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

to  say,  in  the  foreground — are  largest ;  the  things  in  the 
middle,  or  middle  distance,  are  smaller ;  and  the  things 
in  the  far  distance,  or  background,  are  smallest.  And  to 
explain  these  apparently  simple  facts  we  must  exercise  our 
wits. 

You  know  that  when  you  stand  on  the  seashore  and  look 
seaward  the  extent  of  your  vision  is  bounded  by  the  meeting 
of  the  sea  and  sky,  which  boundary  is  called  the  horizon. 
The  horizon  is  the  line  that  follows  the  line  of  your  eyes,  the 
boundary  line.  The  word  is  derived  from  the  Greek  horos, 
a  limit  or  boundary. 

When  you  stand  on  the  beach  and  look  at  the  sea  your 
position  is  low,  and  your  horizon  is  low,  because  it  is  on  a  level 
with  your  eyes. 

But  climb  the  cliffs  and  turn  seaward ;  the  horizon  is  the 
level  of  your  eyes. 

Ascend  to  the  very  top  of  the  cliffs.  Now  you  are  high 
indeed.  Look  again  toward  the  horizon  ;  it  has  extended ; 
again  it  is  the  height  of  your  eyes. 

The  line  of  the  horizon  is  not  always  visible  because  of 
intervening  objects,  but  as  the  horizon  is  the  height  of  the 
artist's  eye  its  position  must  be  clearly  understood,  and  in- 
dicated— for  a  time  at  least — in  your  drawings. 

It  is  possible  that  you  are  still  unconvinced.  Perhaps  you 
live  in  a  city  where  roofs  and  houses  block  a  distant  horizon 
from  view.  Then  we  may  apply  another  illustration  and 
explain  matters  differently. 

Suppose  you  descend  to  the  street  in  a  lift  and  look  up 
at  the  buildings.  What  do  you  see  ?  Every  window,  every 
cornice  and  roof,  coming  down  to  the  level  of  your  eye. 

Now  take  the  lift  to  the  top  story  of  your  tall  building. 
What  do  you  then  see  ?  Everything  reversed.  The  eaves 
of  each  lower  building,  the  roofs  and  cornices,  rising  to  meet 
the  level  of  your  eye. 

And  the  level  of  your  eye  is  the  height  of  your  horizon. 

"  Is  the  thing  below  the  level  of  my  eye,  or  is  it  above  the 
level  of  my  eye  ?  "  is  the  inevitable  question. 
120 


Measuring  and  Perspective 

You  sit  in  a  chair  and  look  at  the  cornice,  the  beading,  the 
top  hne  of  the  picture  frames,  the  mirror  over  the  fireplace — 


Fig.  47.   Above  the  Eye-level 


are  they  not  above  the  eye-level  and  do  they  not  come  down 
to  the  level  of  the  eye  ? 
Cast  your  eye  downward,  still  sitting  on  the  same  chair. 

121 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

What  do  you  see  ?     The  outer  edge  of  the  carpet,  the  rug, 


Fig.  48.  Below  the  Eye-level 

the  wainscot,  fender,  the  rail  before  the  fireplace — all  rise  to 
the  level  of  your  eye. 

You  stand  on  a  railway  bridge  and  look  at  the  long  level 
122 


Measuring  and  Perspective 

stretch  of  the  lines  and  you  note  that  the  rails — wide  as  they 
are  below  your  feet — seem  to  narrow  down  to  a  point  in  the 
far  distance  on  the  horizon.  That  point  is  called  (what  else 
could  it  be  called  ?)  the  Vanishing  Point.  And  perspective 
says  :   All  retiring  lines  have  vanishing  points. 

Have  you  not  observed  the  long  straight  street  and  its 
rows  of  lamp-posts  or  electric-light  standards  and  noted  that 
they  diminish  in  size  as  they  recede,  though  you  know  for  a 
fact  that  they  are  all  uniform  in  size  ? 

As  the  lamps  lessen  in  height,  so  does  the  pavement  narrow, 
and  the  houses  on  each  side  of  the  street  diminish.  For  all 
lines  that  lie  parallel  disappear  to  the  same  point  on  the  horizon 
— the  vanishing  point. 

The  lines  of  the  long  esplanade  by  the  sea,  of  the  long 
buildings,  of  the  long  passage  or  tunnel,  all  recede,  and  if  con- 
tinued in  our  imagination  meet  at  the  level  of  the  eye,  which 
is  the  horizon.  For  the  vanishing  point  is  that  point  on  the 
surface  of  the  picture  where  retiring  lines  if  continued  would 
meet. 

A  large  picture  in  a  frame  is  perhaps  the  easiest  example  of 
parallel  lines  diminishing. 

You  are  well  aware  that  the  sides  of  the  picture  are  parallel. 
They  are  equal.  Measure  with  an  inch  measure  if  you  have 
any  doubts  on  that  point. 

Now  hang  the  picture  on  a  wall ;  stand  aside  and  at  one 
end,  several  paces  away,  and  make  a  quick  sketch  of  it  in  its 
frame.  Does  not  the  near  end  of  the  frame  appear  larger 
than  the  far  end  ?  In  other  words,  the  picture-frame  appears 
smaller  as  it  recedes. 

Measure  the  farthest  end  against  the  nearest  by  holding 
the  pencil  at  arm's  length.  Continue  the  diminishing  lines 
until  they  meet.  Again  we  get  the  vanishing  point  resting 
on  the  (imaginary)  line  of  the  horizon  at  the  height  of  our 
eye. 

Let  us  procure  a  cardboard-box,  and  placing  it  on  a  table, 
three-quarter  view,  and  about  the  height  of  the  eye,  take  up 
our  pencils  and  proceed  to  sketch  it. 

123 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

In  all  probability  you  will  say,  "  I  can't  tell  whether  the 
lines  are  running  up  or  down." 

Can  you  see  the  top  of  the  box  ?  If  you  sit  about  the  same 
height  as  myself,  you  will  say,  "  Yes,  I  can  see  a  little  bit  of 
the  top." 

If  we  see  even  a  small  portion  of  the  top,  the  eye  is  above 
the  top,  and  if  the  eye  is  above  the  box,  what  must  the  lines 
do  but  rise  to  the  level  of  the  eye  ? 

The  top  of  the  box  is  nearest  to  the  level  of  the  eye,  and 


Fig.  49.  Can  you  see  the  Top  of  the  Box  ? 

the  lower  part  of  the  box  is  farther  away  (the  depth  of  the 
box  is  between).  Therefore  the  top  lines  of  the  box  rise  a 
little,  but  the  bottom  lines  rise  a  great  deal. 

If  we  have  two  lines  which  go  gently  on,  one  at  a  slight 
angle  and  one  at  a  stiff  angle,  what  must  be  the  final  result  ? 
They  will  meet  at  the  height  of  your  eye,  or  at  your  horizon. 

The  higher  you  sit  on  your  chair,  the  more  you  can  see 
of  the  top  of  the  box.  The  lower  you  sit,  the  less  you 
can  see. 

Place  the  same  box  on  the  floor,  sit  on  a  chair,  and  make  a 
drawing  of  it. 

Then  place  the  box  at  a  height — say  on  the  top  of  a  cup- 
board about  6|  feet  high — and  draw  it  again. 

In  the  first  drawing,  up  come  the  lines  to  meet  the  level  of 
your  eye.  In  the  second  sketch,  down  come  the  lines  to  the 
same  level.  In  other  words,  your  horizon  in  the  first  drawing 
124 


Measuring  and  Perspective 

is  higher  than  your  object,  in  the  second  drawing  it  is  lowfer 
than  your  object. 

Some   things   have   more   than   one  vanishing  point — for 
instance,    this    same 

cardboard-box.     A  box         Horizcrv     ov    hei^hto^eye 
is    an    angular    object. 


y^ 


It  has  two  sides  which, 


/ 


iL  nas  two  siaes  wnicnj     .  ,  ' 

11  1  1    ^       vaiiish.ia§ 

run    parallel,    and    two  o 

ends  which  also  run 
parallel  one  with  an- 
other. 

Place  the  box  so  that 
two  sides  can  be  ob- 
served, and  sketch  it 
lightly  and  without 
measuring.  Roughly 
sketch  its  position,  and 
decide  whether  the  eye 
is  above  or  below  the 
top  of  the  box,  i.e., 
whether  the  horizon  is 
low  or  high.  Then  draw 
the  line  of  the  horizon 
right  across  the  paper, 
because  hoth  vanishing 
points  must  be  on  the 
same  level — at  the  same 
horizon. 

Young  artists  find  it 
difficult  to  accept  this 

fact.      They  are   exceedingly  prone   to   provide   a   different 
horizon  for  each  different  angle. 

The  horizon  at  sea  runs  straight  across  the  line  of  vision  ; 
as  you  know,  it  runs  level  with  the  eyes.  Then  why  try  to 
reach  several  horizons  in  the  same  picture  ? 

In  other  words,  it  is  not  reasonable  to  assume  two  horizons  in 
drawing  one  object. 

125 


Fig.  50.  The  Rising  Lines 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

If  more  of  one  side  of  the  box  is  seen  than  the  other,  then 
the  side  of  which  we  have  the  broader  view  will  have  its 
vanishing  point  farther  away.  The  side  of  the  box  presenting 
a  more  acute  angle  will  have  its  vanishing  point  nearer. 


<^ 


J^ 


Hortz-of\)       ov  hei^h't     o^  c^e 


Vanishing  voi'fl-t 


Fig.  51.   The  Falling  Lines 


The  vanishing  points  will  be  near  or  far  apart  according  to 
the  angles. 

The  farther  the  vanishing  points  are  apart,  the  farther  we 
are  from  the  object ;  and  the  nearer  we  are  to  the  object, 
the  nearer  together  are  the  vanishing  points. 

We  may  now  feel  justified  in  drawing  something  a  little 
more  ambitious  and  a  little  more  interesting  than  a  box.  If 
we  select  something  the  shape  of  which  bears  a  general  re- 
semblance to  that  of  a  box  and  place  it  in  the  same  position, 
136 


Fig.  52.   VAJitsHiNG  Point  close  to  Spectator 


^ 


Measuring  and  Perspective 

we  shall  have  the  same  perspective.  A  toy  house  standing 
on  a  little  platform  will  serve  our  purpose  excellently.  The 
parallel  lines  of  the  projecting  chimney-pot,  the  upper  line  of 
the  roof,  the  lower  line  of  the  roof,  the  lower  line  of  the  roof 
on  the  far  side  of  the  house,  the  near  line  of  the  platform, 
and  the  far  line  of  the  platform — these  all  run  parallel  and 
meet  on  the  horizon,  the  eye -level  on  the  left  of  the  diagram ; 
while  the  front  angles,  the  two  overhanging  points  of  the  eaves, 
the  base  of  the  house,  the  front  base  of  the  platform,  the 
windows,  shutters,  and  doorways,  all  lie  parallel,  and  disappear 
at  the  other  vanishing  point  on  the  right  of  the  diagram. 

When  you  are  sketching  houses,  boxes,  or  other  objects  that 
demand  clear  perspective,  do  not  begin  by  drawing  a  mere 
plan  of  the  lines.     Remember  you  are  trying  to  be  an  artist. 

Sketch  your  house  first,  then  puzzle  out  your  perspective. 
Check  the  drawing  by  the  perspective,  never  the  perspective 
by  the  drawing.  You  will  find,  as  time  goes  on,  that  you 
will  rightly  register  the  perspective  with  more  and  more  ease. 

Rules  for  perspective  might  be  cited  without  end,  but  a 
few  diagrams  well  studied  will  obviate  many  questions. 

Receding  lines  that  are  not  parallel  to  the  earth,  says  a  per- 
spective rule,  do  not  meet  on  the  horizon,  but  either  above  or 
below. 

The  sloping  lid  of  a  box,  the  sloping  flap  of  a  cellar,  and 
the  sloping  roof  of  a  house  do  not  lie  parallel  with  the  earth. 
This  rule  is  clearly  demonstrated  in  the  diagrams  shown  on 
pp.  130  and  131. 

The  student  often  meets  in  examination  papers  the  state- 
ment :  "  The  drawing  of  a  direct  front  view,  or  a  full  side 
view,  will  disqualify  a  candidate." 

"  Why  is  this  ?  "  students  invariably  ask. 

Think  for  a  minute. 

A  box,  a  table,  a  wall,  that  faces  your  vision  exactly  has 
lines  that  lie  parallel,  and  never  meet.  They  cannot  meet 
because  they  do  not  recede  from  you. 

A  full  front  view,  or  a  full  side  view,  has  no  vanishing  point 
right  or  left. 

I  129 


-50? 


Cfi 


5: 


u — 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

Therefore  it  must  be  crystal-clear  that  such  views  offer  no 
test  of  accurate  perspective  drawing. 

Then  we  have  this  rule  : 

'Parallel  lines  that  do  not  recede  never  have  the  appearance  of 
meeting  anywhere. 

Look  at  the  diagram  of  a  village  street. 

The  nature  of  the  ground  prevents  the  building  of  a  long 
straight  street,  and  the  houses  are  dotted  about.  Although 
they  present  a  diminishing  effect  (they  are  receding  from  the 
vision),  yet  they  diminish  to  the  horizon  at  four  different 
points.     Observe  this  well ;   it  will  demonstrate  that : 

//  there  are  ten  retiring  lines  and  all  parallel,  there  will  he 
only  one  vanishing  point  for  all ;  hut  if  among  the  ten  there  are 
not  two  parallel  lines,  there  will  he  ten  vanishing  points. 

Perspective  comes  to  our  aid  when  we  are  perplexed  with 
curves  of  arches,  bridges,  and  doorways — beautiful  objects 
that  tempt  the  pencil  and  deceive  the  eye. 

First  sketch  the  arch  or  window,  marking  the  direction  of 
the  base,  the  thickness  of  the  wall ;  then,  if  you  are  in  doubt 
about  the  rightful  position  of  the  curve,  and  the  highest 
point  of  the  arch,  enclose  the  base  lines  in  a  square,  drop  a  line 
from  each  corner,  and  at  the  intersection  (or  meeting-place) 
draw  an  upright  line  ;  that  should  find  the  centre  of  the  arch. 

In  other  words,  enclose  curved  shapes  in  rectangular  shapes. 

Although  a  single  arch,  or  even  a  couple  of  arches,  might 
be  sketched  fairly  correctly  without  such  aid,  a  cluster  of 
arches  presents  a  more  complicated  problem,  and  we  should 
feel  justified  in  using  this  method  of  checking  perspective. 

Circles,  we  know,  are  exceedingly  difficult  to  draw  correctly. 
An  artist,  of  course,  should  draw  circles  without  resorting  to 
mechanical  means,  but  a  beginner,  on  occasion,  may  wish  to 
check  his  drawing  of  a  circle  by  enclosing  it  in  a  square. 

In  Fig.  57  we  have  an  upright  circle  in  a  square,  also  a 
circle  enclosed  in  a  square  and  in  perspective — i.e.,  receding 
from  the  spectator. 

Strictly  speaking,  many  perspective  problems  belong  to 
geometry  and  not  to  art,  and  provided  that  we  understand  a 
132 


Measuring  and  Perspective 

few  simple  rules,  we  need  not  worry  ourselves  with  intricate 
problems. 

But  there  is  one  deduction  to  which  we  must  pay  attention. 


Fig.  56.  The  Fobeshorteking  op  Curves  and  Arches 

Every  receding  line  or  surface  must  necessarily  be  fore- 
shortened. 

What  is  foreshortening  ? 

A  coin  seen  upright  and  straight  in  front  is  a  perfect  circle  ; 
a  coin  seen  lying  down  is  a  coin  diminished  and  a  coin  fore- 
shortened.    In  the  first  example  the  circle  is  complete.     In 

1S3 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

the  second  example  the  surface  of  the  coin  is  receding  and  the 
coin  appears  to  be  thicker  in  the  part  nearest  the  spectator. 
It  does  not  appear  to  be  a  perfect  circle. 

Every  object  or  thing  that  advances  toward  the  spectator 
is  foreshortened.  For  instance,  some  one  points  a  finger 
directly  at  the  artist.  What  does  the  artist  see  ?  He  sees 
the  tip  of  the  finger,  the  tip  of  the  thumb,  the  width  of  bent 
fingers,  knuckles,  palm,  and  arm,  but  the  planes  or  surfaces 
that  recede — such  as  the  shaft  of  the  finger  itself,  the  fore- 


\ 

Fig.  57.  A  Coin  Upright  and  a  Coin  Foreshortened 

arm,  and  the  upper  arm — all  these  are  seen  in  a  foreshortened 
state. 

Put  up  your  own  hand  and  clench  your  fingers,  but  with 
the  thumb  erect.  Now  lower  the  upper  part  of  the  thumb, 
inclining  it  away  from  your  vision.  Your  thumb  is  now  fore- 
shortened, the  upper  part  is  receding. 

The  human  figure,  being  a  rounded  object,  must  always 
present  some  parts  foreshortened. 

In  the  head,  the  width  of  the  shoulder,  the  width  of  the 
hips,  the  smooth  rounded  limbs,  the  curves  of  foot  and  hand 
— nowhere  do  we  find  an  absolutely  flat  surface. 

If  you  wish  to  find  the  human  figure  depicted  without  any 
foreshortening,  you  must  refer  to  the  drawings  and  carvings 
of  the  ancient  Egyptians,  In  Fig.  58  we  have  a  copy  from  a 
carving  produced  about  the  year  1490  B.C.  (For  the  laws  of 
134 


Measuring  and  Perspective 

perspective  were  all  but  unknown  until  the  fifteenth  century.) 
And  what  do  you  find  ? 

The  head  in  profile,  the  shoulders  squarely  and  flatly  pre- 
sented (front  view),  the  legs  apparently  tacked  on  to  a  flat 
surface  instead  of  a  rounded  body,  for  they  do  not  recede 
one  behind  the  other,  but  present  knee  against  knee-joint, 
ankle  against  ankle,  and  foot  against 
foot.  And  to  add  to  the  peculiarities 
of  early  Egyptian  art,  the  front  view  of 
the  eye  is  inserted  along  the  profile  view 
of  the  forehead,  nose,  mouth,  and  chin. 

Does  this  not  bring  home  that  unless 
you  absorb  a  few  laws  of  perspective, 
proportions,  and  foreshortening,  you  will 
find  yourself  heavily  handicapped  ? 

You  can  provide  yourself  with  a  good 
deal  of  amusement  and  useful  instruction 
by  searching  for  perspective,  not  only  in 
your  own  paintings  and  drawings,  but  in 
the  work  of  other  people. 

Study  pictures  in  books  and  magazines, 
and  photographs  in  the  daily  papers, 
and  you  will  find  endless  examples  of 
perspective. 

By  tracing  parallel  lines  and  finding  vanishing  points  of 
planes  and  surfaces,  much  that  bewildered  you  in  the  past 
will  become  clear  and  reasonable. 

Planes,  horizontal  planes  and  perpendicular  planes,  are 
terms  constantly  used  with  regard  to  perspective. 

A  horizontal  plane  is  a  plane  parallel  with  the  earth  ;  a  per- 
pendicular plane  is  one  perpendicular  to  the  earth.  The  top  of 
a  table  and  the  ceiling  of  a  room  are  horizontal  planes  ;  the 
walls  of  the  room  are  perpendicular  planes. 

It  might,  very  reasonably,  be  concluded  that  in  using  the 
words  "  tracing  parallel  lines  "  I  intended  to  convey  that 
lines  should  be  drawn  across  the  pictures.  But  that  certainly 
was  not  my  intention.     There  is  no  necessity  to  commit  the 

135 


Fig.  68.  Egyptian 

FiGUKE 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

crime  of  scribbling  with  pencil  or  ink  on  the  printed  pages. 
A  thread  of  white  or  black  silk  or  cotton  laid  upon  the  sur- 
face will  serve  your  purpose. 

To  explain  more  clearly.  Lay  a  thread  of  cotton  on  one 
of  the  perspective  diagrams,  hold  one  end  on  the  vanishing 
point,  and  from  that  angle  swivel  the  thread  on  to  the 
various  parallel  lines.  Remove  the  thread  to  each  vanishing 
point. 

Test  any  of  the  perspective  examples  in  this  way  by  merely 
laying  the  thread  on  the  paper,  holding  the  right  thumb  on 
the  thread  at  the  vanishing  point.  An  old  reel  with  a  small 
quantity  of  cotton  is,  perhaps,  easiest  to  handle,  then  the 
thread  does  not  slip  out  of  the  left  hand. 

Use  black  thread  if  the  drawing  is  lightly  sketched  on 
white  paper,  and  white  thread  if  the  picture  is  in  a  dark 
tone. 

Let  me  presume  that  you  wish  to  analyse  the  perspective 
of  the  accompanying  photograph  of  a  picture-gallery,  which 
is  a  very  simple  example. 

Lay  the  thread  first  against  the  lowest  line  of  the  left  wall, 
and  find  the  inclination  of  the  floor ;  then  lay  it  on  the  top 
line  near  the  ceiling.  You  will  easily  discover  the  point 
where  these  two  lines  meet.  Hold  the  thread  on  that  place 
and  test  the  right-hand  side  of  the  picture  by  laying  the 
thread  first  against  the  base  and  then  against  the  summit  of 
the  pillars. 

By  careful  adjustment  you  will  soon  fix  the  actual  position 
of  the  vanishing  point,  which  lies,  does  it  not,  between  the 
two  dark  frames  on  the  facing  (far)  wall  and  the  light  frames 
of  the  two  adjoining  pictures. 

All  the  pictures  on  the  left-hand  wall  lie  parallel  with  the 
wall  and  diminish  as  they  recede.  All  the  pillars  on  the  right 
side  diminish  both  in  height  and  bulk.  Is  not  the  nearer 
pillar  a  great  deal  larger  in  girth  than  the  next,  and  the 
second  pillar  larger  than  the  third  ? 

Although  the  pictures  are  grouped  at  different  heights  from 
the  ground,  yet  they  all  diminish  to  the  same  vanishing 
136 


Measuring  and  Perspective 

point — the  vanishing  point  which  Hes  on  the  horizon,  this 
being  the  height  of  the  camera  lens. 

The  pictures  on  the  far  wall  exactly  face  the  spectator, 
therefore  they  do  not  diminish. 

You  were  told  to  lay  the  thread  first  on  the  floor,  then  on 
the  ceiling.  This  is  always  the  wisest  plan.  If  you  find  the 
boundary  lines  correctly,  then  all  within  those  lines  falls  into 
place. 

When  you  are  drawing  from  Nature  always  check  the  out- 
side lines.  If  sketching  the  whole  of  the  house,  find  the  top 
line  of  the  roof,  and  the  base  of  the  walls  ;  then  the  rest  of 
the  roof,  the  windows,  doorways,  lintel,  and  porch  will  all 
fall  into  place  and  save  you  an  enormous  amount  of  needless 
bother.  If  the  outside  lines  are  correct,  then  it  stands  to 
reason  that  everything  within  those  lines  will  agree. 

It  matters  not  whether  it  is  only  a  box  or  a  house,  a  barn 
or  a  chair,  a  boat  or  a  book — always,  always  check  the  extreme 
limit. 

By  the  very  simple  aid  of  a  thread  you  can  discover  many 
things.  You  can  trace  the  low  horizon  of  pictures  that  repre- 
sent the  low-lying  ground.  You  will  also  discover  that  the 
low  horizon  gives  ample  space  for  the  sky,  and  that  clouds 
also  conform  to  the  laws  of  perspective  and  disappear  as  they 
recede. 

Pictures  of  interiors  of  houses  are  extremely  interesting. 
There  you  note  that  the  walls,  floor,  and  ceiling  (or  rafters 
of  the  roof)  diminish  to  the  same  vanishing  point  (because 
they  lie  parallel  one  to  another),  but  that  the  chairs  and 
tables,  unless  they  are  arranged  parallel  with  the  walls, 
have  each  a  separate  vanishing  point,  though  each  vanish- 
ing point  must,  of  necessity,  meet  on  the  same  horizon.  (See 
Fig.  53.) 

By  making  a  friend  of  perspective  and  interesting  our- 
selves in  its  various  little  problems,  looking  not  only  for 
the  perspective  in  our  own  drawings,  but  for  the  per- 
spective in  others,  we  shall  soon  acquire  a  useful  amount  of 
knowledge. 

137 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

Shadows  and  reflections  both  bow  to  the  law  of  perspective. 
Reflections  in  water,  we  are  told,  are  geometrical  but  not 
pictorial.     Objects  are  repeated  in  water  geometrically. 

All  reflections  of  lines  parallel  with  the  surface  of  the  water 
vanish  on  the  horizon  at  the  same  point. 

For  example,  we  sketch  two  upright  posts  supporting  a 
beam  of  wood. 

The  beam  diminishes  as  it  inclines  toward  the  horizon ; 
carry  on  these  diminishing  lines  till  they  meet  on  the 
horizon. 

The  lines  in  the  beam  of  wood  reflected  in  the  water  are 
parallel  with  those  in  the  actual  beam  above ;  these  too  must 
incline  to  the  same  vanishing  point. 

If  a  bridge  is  sketched  with  the  curve  of  its  arch  reflected 
in  the  water,  the  reflection  must  incline  toward  the  same 
horizon  and  the  same  vanishing  point. 

It  is  quite  possible  that  you  are  a  keen  observer,  and  that 
your  quick  eye  has  already  noticed  these  facts.  Nevertheless 
there  is  no  harm  in  impressing  them  upon  you.  Water  is 
exceedingly  deceptive.  The  rippling  play  of  the  winds  on 
the  surface  and  the  break  of  the  waves  are  apt  to  lead  the 
eye  astray.  Which  point  was  realized  by  many  of  the  Old 
Masters,  who  safeguarded  themselves  by  omitting  reflections 
and  painting  sky  and  water  with  the  same  colour  and  the 
same  brush. 

Now  for  a  final  observation  ;  perhaps  you  have  not  noticed 
that  the  reflection  of  the  sun  and  moon,  the  stars  and  the 
clouds,  are  the  same  distance  below  the  horizon  as  the 
originals  are  above. 

It  is  by  no  means  uncommon  to  find  a  young  student 
neglecting  shapes  and  proportions  of  shadows ;  and  here 
perspective  holds  out  a  helping  hand. 

The  extent  of  the  shadow  is  ruled  by  the  position  of  the  source 
of  light. 

When  the  sun  is  high  in  the  heavens  the  shadows  are  com- 
paratively short.  When  the  sun  is  sinking  the  rays  elongate. 
That  is  a  matter  of  pure  observation.  Even  a  baby  will 
138 


VIoYlZ  o(\i 


of.  lines  parallel  vutfi  th^ 

Vanrsh,   on  the  iioi'J7or\. 
■to  the-  sawe  poLfii 


a  re  the,  -""- 

below 

-The. 

boruo 

as. 

the. 


Fig.  60.  Reflections 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

sometimes  notice  the  long  shadows  cast  by  a  stone,  the 
flickering  ribbon  of  shade  thrown  across  its  path  when  the 
sun  is  low  on  the  horizon. 

By  comparing  diagrams  of  sun  and  shade  you  can  make 
your  own  deductions. 

The  sun  is  so  far  removed  from  the  earth's  surface  that  its  rays 
are  'parallel.  But  the  rays  from  lamp  or  candle  radiate  on  all 
sides  and  cannot  be  considered  parallel. 


140 


CHAPTER  XII 

Sketching  Out  of  Doors 

To  the  keen,  enthusiastic  young  artist  there  is  nothing 
more  fascinating,  more  enthralHng,  than  sketching 
out  of  doors. 

A  walk  abroad  among  foreign  scenes  and  strange  people 
or  a  walk  at  home  among  one's  own  familiar  haunts  can  be 
equally  fruitful. 

There  are  one  or  two  points  which  need  explaining,  and 
one  or  two  pitfalls  of  which  the  novice  might  be  warned. 

For  the  ardent  young  sketcher  frequently  digs  a  pit  for 
his  own  feet.  He  begins  a  '  sketch,'  but  he  pursues  it  into 
a  finished  study. 

A  sketch,  it  must  be  remembered,  should  he  a  sketch  and 
nothing  more.     It  is  a  trifle,  an  impression. 

"  How  unfinished  !  "  remarks  some  one,  looking  over  the 
young  artist's  shoulder.  Do  not  let  the  remark  influence  you 
against  your  better  judgment. 

Did  you  begin  the  sketch  as  an  impression  of  a  particular 
thing — the  wind  swaying  a  spray  of  flowers,  a  branch,  or  a 
tree,  a  cloud  passing  over  a  distant  hill  and  blurring  its  con- 
tour, a  scrap  of  rugged  masonry,  a  sunny  portion  of  a  terrace, 
a  garden  seat,  a  toy  flung  on  the  grass,  a  fragment  of  a 
flower  over  which  a  bird  or  butterfly  hovers  ?  Then  do  not 
try  to  finish  it.  All  the  spirit  of  the  sketch  will  vanish  if 
you  '  finish '  one  tiny  portion  at  the  expense  of  another 
part. 

Experience,  that  hard  taskmaster,  and  experience  only, 
will  teach  you  how  far  to  carry  your  sketch. 

But  the  main  thing  to  remember  is  this.  If  you  wish  to 
sketch — sketch.     Leave  the  finished  study  for  other  times. 

141 


,  % 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

And  never,  never  tinker  with  your  sketch  when  you  take  it 

home. 

Now,  having  given  fair  warning,  let  us  proceed  to  details. 
The   secret  of  successful  sketching  is  to  arrive  at  your 

chosen  place  fresh  and  eager  for  work. 

If  you  burden  yourself  with  a  lot  of  sketching  paraphernalia, 

you  will  arrive  with 
aching  arms,  hot  and 
tired,  and  possibly  cross. 
"  Travel  light  when 
sketching "  is  a  good 
motto.  Take  with  you 
only  essential  sketching 
materials.  A  block  or  a 
book,  and,  if  the  book 
has  limp  covers,  a  piece 
of  board  or  stiff  card- 
board on  which  to  rest 
it,  a  pencil,  india- 
rubber,  paint-box, 
brushes,  and  a  bottle 
of  water  are  necessities. 
An  easel,  a  camp-stool, 
a  sketching  umbrella, 
personally  I  should  re- 
gard as  superfluous. 
It  is  usually  possible  to  hold  your  book  in  such  a  way  that 

your  paper  is  shaded  by  your  shoulder,  your  hat,  or  the 

opposite  page. 

A  stile,  fence,  stone,  stump,  or  bank  more  often  than  not 

offers  a  convenient  resting-place  and  saves  you  the  trouble 

of  carrying  a  camp-stool. 

If  the  weather  is  damp,  an  ordinary  newspaper  carried 

under  your  sketch-book  and  folded  and  used  as  a  cushion  is 

a  good  precaution  against  catching  colds  ;  should  the  weather 

be  very  hot  the  same  paper,  folded  and  held  fan-wise,  shields 

the  page  from  the  glare  of  the  sun. 

142 


Fig.  61.  An  Impression 


Sketching  Out  of  Doors 

A  great  point  is  gained  by  starting  in  a  business-like  frame 
of  mind.  It  is  a  mistaken  idea  that  an  artist  drifts  into 
painting  a  picture  as  a  cloud  drifts  across  the  sky.  To 
obtain  practical  results  you  must  start  with  practical  inten- 
tions. You  must  be  firm  with  yourself.  You  must  choose 
your  subject  quickly  and  settle  down  determinedly,  and  you 
must  not  he  too  ambitious.  Young  people  balk  their  efforts 
by  attempting  subjects  that  are  so  ambitious  that  they  might 
well  make  a  practised  artist  hesitate. 

"  I  should  love  to  paint  a  field  of  corn,  with  poppies  and 
convolvuluses  .  ,  .  and  perhaps  a  little  dip  of  the  sea — 
and  a  glimpse  of  the  village  church  beyond,"  one  will  exclaim. 

And  another  will  say  : 

"  Let's  go  on  the  beach  and  sketch  the  harbour,  and  the 
boats,  and  the  cliffs.     It  would  be  simply  topping  !  " 

I  admit  the  attractiveness  of  such  subjects.  The  very 
suggestion  quickens  one's  pulses.     But  the  difficulties  ! 

Once  upon  a  time  there  was  a  man  of  most  eloquent  tongue 
who  wrote  about  art,  and  more  especially  about  pictures. 
He  advised  artists  to  take  a  stone  and  study  that.  There's 
something  very  interesting  in  the  drawing  of  an  old  lichened 
stone,  though  it  is  far  from  easy.  A  wise  principle  of  selec- 
tion, however,  is — choose  one  simple  subject  rather  than  a 
dozen  complicated  ones. 

From  the  field  of  corn  choose  a  blade  of  wheat  with  per- 
haps the  tendril  of  a  convolvulus  creeping  up  its  stalk  ;  a 
cluster  of  poppies,  a  tall  grass.  If  a  butterfly  flutters  near, 
watch  intently  the  angle  of  his  wings,  the  exquisite  poise  of 
his  body,  the  clutching,  delicate  strength  of  the  tiny  legs, 
and  draw  your  remembrance  of  him. 

In  a  meadow-land  of  gold  and  silver,  where  cows  are  "  forty 
feeding  like  one,"  choose  a  spray  of  buttercups,  a  single  fine 
marguerite  ;  take  one  cow  under  your  observation  ;  make  a 
sketch  of  a  portion  of  a  tree,  a  gnarled  branch,  or  some 
twisted  roots  with  an  over-curling  plume  of  a  fern.  Sketch 
the  stile,  or  the  fragment  of  a  paling  round  which  a  spray  of 
ivy  is  climbing. 

143 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

Should  you  wish  to  sketch  a  cottage,  be  careful  not  to  sit 
too  near.     If  you  do,  your  perspective  will  be  very  violent 


Fig.  62.  When  sketchinq  a  Cottage  do  not  sit  too  near 

and  look  exaggerated.     Sit  half  a  meadow  away  rather  than 
at  the  front  gate. 

And  if  the  cottage  is  complicated  (that  is,  filled  with  detail, 
the  thatch  deep  and  overhanging,  the  creepers  thick  and 
concealing  the  shape  of  the  wall,  and  the  little  lattice-windows 
nearly  hidden  from  view),  draw  a  portion  of  the  cottage — a 
144 


Sketching  Out  of  Doors 

corner  of  the  eaves  and  one  window,  a  portion  of  the  roof 
and  the  queer  old  chimney,  the  porch  with  its  potted  plants 
and  window-seat,  or  the  well-head  with  its  dripping  rope  and 


Fig.  63 

shining  pail.  And  a  word  of  advice  about  a  garden.  There 
is  nothing  more  difficult  than  garden  scenes.  The  subjects 
are  many,  the  lights  are  often  broken,  the  shadows  are  con- 
fused. Content  yourself  with  a  woodshed,  or  portion  of  a 
summer-house,  a  few  mossy  steps,  a  garden  roller,  a  corner  of 
the  terrace,  a  wheelbarrow,  or  a  cluster  of  pots  and  a  trowel. 
At  the  outset  ask  yourself  whether  the  object  you  intend 
to  draw  will  best  fit  an  oblong  or  upright  sheet  of  paper. 

K  145 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

If  you  wish  to  draw  a  tall  subject,  such  as  a  tree,  a  narrow 
building,  an  upright  flower  or  figure,  hold  your  sketch-book 
in  an  upright  position.  If  you  intend  drawing  a  long-shaped 
subject,  a  reclining  figure  of  a  person  or  animal,  a  wide- 
spreading  building,  a 
stretch  of  low-lying 
ground,  hold  the  book 
open  at  the  full  width 
of  the  page. 

Beginners  are  prone 
to  dash  at  a  subject, 
and,  finding  they  have 
drawn  it  on  a  smaller 
scale  than  they  intended, 
add  other  details  until 
the  page  is  filled. 

But  why  fill  the  whole 
page  ?  An  artist's 
sketch-book  is  a  book 
of  scraps.  He  seldom 
carries  his  sketches  up 
to  the  margin  of  his 
paper.  One  page  may, 
and  often  does,  carry 
an  amazing  variety  of 
subjects. 

If  you  decide   to  do 

Fig.  64.  The  Well-head  nij.ii  . 

^  a  small  sketch  keep  to 

that  intention.  Should  you  feel  unhappy  because  a  wide 
margin  surrounds  your  small  sketch,  frame  the  sketch  with 
a  lightly  drawn  pencil  line. 

It  is  astonishing  how  important  are  these  apparently  trivial 
matters,  how  much  they  influence  the  sketch  for  good  or  ill. 

We  will  presume  that  you  have  arrived  at  your  destination 
and  are  sitting  in  a  shady  place,  faced  with  a  bewildering 
number  of  beautiful  things.  After  fixing  and  unfixing  your 
mind  many  times  you  at  length  decide  to  draw  something 
146 


Fig.  65.  Flowering  Rushes 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

that  is  close  at  hand — a  tiny  clump  of  white  flowers  with 
feathery  foliage,  golden  disks,  and  silvery  petals  growing 
humbly  near  the  shorn  stubble  of  the  cornfield.  It  is  a  wise 
selection.  Being  of  a  lowly  habit,  the  flowers  will  not  be 
tossed  and  stirred  by  the  wind,  and  so  worry  you  at  the  very 
outset  of  your  task.  Moreover,  the  flowers  have  simple 
forms.  They  resemble  tiny  umbrellas  with  long  handles. 
Draw  first  the  shape  and  curve  of  the  slender  stem,  then  the 
circular  gold  centre,  then  the  '  mass  '  shape  of  the  petals, 
dividing  up  each  petal  later,  noting  their  wayward  manner 
of  growing. 

After  this  your  eye  probably  will  be  attracted  by  the 
gorgeous  berries  of  the  woody  nightshade  twisting  its  jewels 
round  the  ash  stump  and  fence. 

Draw  the  post  and  paling  before  the  entwining  tendrils  and 
stalks.  Wide-flung  circles  and  rampant  growth  such  as 
these  lead  the  eye  astray.  But  if  the  upright  post  and  the 
cross-piece  are  once  fixed  on  paper,  then  we  have  two  simple 
and  solid  shapes  lending  contrast  to  the  delicacy  of  the 
twining  stem.  If  you  began  by  drawing  the  stem  of  the 
plant,  your  eye  might  be  misled  by  its  strength  and  sinews. 
The  foliage  is  vigorous.  There  is  no  feeble  indecision  in  the 
sweeping  curves  and  twisted  heart-shaped  leaves.  Sketch 
the  looping  curves  of  the  stem,  then  place  the  leaves,  drawing 
from  tip  to  tip  on  the  outside  edges.  The  berries  gem  the 
post  in  fanciful  clusters,  hanging  from  thread-like  stems. 
Make  the  post  firm  and  strong  and  shade  it  broadly.  The 
richest  tone,  however,  is  reserved  for  the  berries,  and  the 
leaves  have  a  high  polish. 

It  is  undoubtedly  a  tempting  subject  for  the  brush.  Mix 
your  colours  clearly.  The  berries  will  probably  attract  your 
first  attention.  Try  to  get  the  rich  tints  glowing  and  bright, 
then  the  colour  of  the  leaves,  allowing  for  their  transparency 
by  laying  the  paint  freshly  and  broadly,  and,  when  dry, 
adding  some  of  the  deep  greens  and  browns  of  the  back- 
ground. 

In  all  probability  you  will  be  disappointed  with  your  first 
148 


<    f/ 


Fig.  G6.    Sketching  Plants.     Thumbnail  Landscape  Sketches 


148 


Sketching  Out  of  Doors 

efforts.  The  open  air  is  one  of  the  most  exacting  of  con- 
ditions. The  pure  clear  atmosphere  reveals  every  blot  and 
blemish.  Your  model  challenges  your  poor  attempts  with  its 
incomparable  beauty. 

Nevertheless,  do  not  be  discouraged,  for  you  have  this  great 
encouragement,  that  if  the  painting  or  drawing  looks  at  all 
passable  out  of  doors  it  will  look  infinitely  better  within 
doors. 

A  clump  of  brilliantly  coloured  fungi  is  a  delicious  subject 
for  pencil  or  brush,  and  one  that  is  often  found  in  the  wood- 
lands on  a  summer's  day.  What  could  be  more  simple  in 
form  than  a  toadstool,  with  its  curved  top  and  ridged  surface 
beneath,  and  the  bulbous-shaped  stalk  ?  Being  a  rounded 
surface,  one  part  will  be  lighter  than  another.  Try  to  place 
the  shading  correctly.  The  edge  of  the  fungus  may  be 
broken,  chipped,  splotched,  or  stained.  Do  not  neglect  any 
of  these  happy  accidents.  Dame  Nature  springs  the  most 
extraordinary  surprises  upon  those  bent  on  discovering  her 
secrets,  and  if  we  are  lax  in  small  matters  we  shall  miss  the 
beauties  in  larger  objects  later  on. 

A  trailing  spray  of  blackberry  is  a  charming  subject  for 
brush  and  pencil  alike.  Sketch  the  direction  of  the  spray, 
then  the  mass  of  each  spray,  then  the  direction  of  each  leaf 
in  the  spray. 

When  the  sun  is  high  in  the  heavens  and  the  colours  are 
faint  and  sickly,  use  your  pencil  instead  of  a  brush. 

A  bit  of  a  fence  overhanging  a  piece  of  rock  or  sandstone, 
or  a  fence  topping  a  grassy  bank,  or  a  stile  dividing  two  fields, 
are  equally  interesting  subjects  for  a  sketch. 

And  here  I  must  repeat  myself  at  the  risk  of  appearing 
wearisome.  In  no  case  do  I  wish  you  to  choose  necessarily 
the  subject  that  I  have  discussed.  My  examples  are  chosen, 
first,  because  they  are  simple  and  direct ;  secondly,  because 
they  are  within  reach  of  the  majority  of  young  artists  ;  and, 
thirdly,  because  they  represent  variations  of  themes  found 
over  a  broad  area. 

Draw  the  nearest  upright  post,  get  the  direction  of  the 

149 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

farther  ones,  and  the  bars  that  link  the  three.  If  you  are  in 
doubt  about  the  angle  of  the  bars  hold  your  pencil  at  arm's 
length  and  then  you  will  note  their  direction.  If  you  desire 
to  check  the  perspective,  lay  your  book  on  the  ground  and 
seek  for  a  long  piece  of  slender  grass.  Hold  one  end  of  the 
grass  on  the  right  of  your  drawing  and  above  the  top  bar — 


Fig.  67.  Choose  Simple  Subjects 

for  that  is  the  height  of  the  eye  in  this  little  sketch  (Fig.  68). 
The  palings  are  curved  and  bent,  and  overhang  the  rock.  The 
rock  is  a  thick  crumbling  substance,  its  rounded  edge  pro- 
jects, and  its  flat  surface  is  slightly  cleft  and  cast  into  shadow. 
Always  draw  the  largest  and  most  important  parts  first, 
such  as  the  fence,  and  the  rock,  then  add  the  grass  tufting 
the  summit,  and  the  bramble  swinging  down  into  space.  An 
oak-tree  stands  close  by.  Its  roots  have  become  welded  into 
crevices  of  the  rock,  and  it  rears  a  twisted  and  graceful  trunk 
bending  slightly  backward  in  its  efforts  to  reach  the  sun. 
The  rock  and  tree  have  characteristics  in  common.  Sketch 
the  mass  of  the  projecting  boulder,  then  the  root  of  the  tree, 
150 


^»S^Y\  ""^ 


'-^r: 


^ 


Fig.  71.  The  Twig  of  a 
Poplar 


Fig.  72.    A   POPLAK-TREE 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

mark  the  girth  of  the  trunk,  and  draw  the  tree,  building  up 
with  big  curves,  and  noting  the  snake-hke  twist  of  the 
slender  branches.  Mark  the  richest  and  deepest  shadows, 
how  the  shadows  break  into  shadow  shapes  of  twigs,  leaves, 
and  grass. 

Trees  are  difficult — that  much  is  admitted  even  by  Ian, 
who  is  devoted  to  his  pencil. 

"  Oh,  yes,"  said  Ian,  "  I  can  draw  horses,  and  men,  and 
houses — but  trees "  and  he  paused  thoughtfully. 

To  draw  a  tree  from  life,  we  must  aim  at  the  main  structure. 
First  draw  the  trunk,  then  the  biggest  branches,  lastly  the 
leaves. 

There  is  a  curious  fact  about  trees  that  is  worth  recording, 
for  it  is  often  helpful  when  we  are  faced  with  the  difficulties 
of  grasping  such  a  big  subject.  A  branch  of  a  tree  will  have 
all  the  characteristics  of  the  tree  itself. 

Examine  a  small  branch  of  an  oak-tree — just  a  spray  of 
leaves.  Are  they  not  sturdy,  stout  fellows  ?  Does  not  each 
twig  strike  out  in  an  independent  fashion — spreading 
strongly  ?  And  is  not  the  branch  from  which  the  twig  is 
broken  gnarled  and  twisted,  stubborn  and  strong  ?  Walk 
some  distance  away  from  the  oak-tree,  then  turn  and  observe 
it  carefully. 

Has  not  the  tree  the  same  characteristics  as  the  branch,  as 
the  twig  ? 

Compare  a  twig  of  the  poplar-tree  with  the  tree  itself.  Is 
not  the  twig  the  same  pyramid  shape  as  the  parent  tree  ? 

It  is  a  good  idea  to  draw  some  twigs  of  a  tree  before  trying 
to  draw  the  tree  itself.  And  this  is  an  excellent  subject  when 
the  weather  is  too  cold  to  stand  out  of  doors.  Gather  some 
bare  twigs  and  carry  them  home  and  make  careful  drawings 
of  the  twigs.  When  spring  is  approaching  you  will  find 
delightful  little  subjects  in  the  swinging  green  and  red  catkins 
and  the  soft  down  of  the  pussy  willows,  and  autumn  provides 
us  with  a  wealth  of  clustering  nuts.  Which  studies  will  help 
you  with  your  drawing  of  the  tree. 

When  drawing  the  branch  of  a  tree  look  from  one  side  to 
152 


sketching  Out  of  Doors 

another  side,  from  one  angle  to  another  angle.  Build  up  the 
tree,  as  if  it  were  growing  under  your  pencil,  with  its  rough- 
ness, nodules,  and  irregularities.     Do  not  draw  it  too  smoothly. 


Fiff.  73.  Twigs  in  Early  Spring 


like  the  polished  leg  of  a  table,  but  try  to  give  it  a  natural 
sturdy  growth. 

Trees  of  a  striking  peculiarity  are  easiest  to  draw,  as  are 
people  with  strongly  marked  features.     Such  are  Scotch  fir- 


Fig.  74.  Twigs  of  Trees  without  Leaves 

trees  with  spiky  needles,  bony  branches,  and  spiked  trunks  ; 
thorn-trees,  small  and  twisted  with  the  winds ;  oak-trees 
that  have  braved  many  a  storm,  with  lopped  branches  and 
thin  foliage. 

You  will  find  it  interesting  to  sketch  clumps  of  trees  with 
the  brush,  either  in  black  or  white  or  colour — a  few  tall  elm- 
trees  in  a  distant  meadow,  or  a  fringe  of  fir-trees  against 

153 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

the  sky.  This  teaches 
you  to  observe  trees 
as  a  whole,  and  also 
impresses  upon  you 
the  varied  silhouette 
of  each  type  of  tree. 
Before  we  embark 
on  the  subject  of 
landscape  —  for  our 
horizon  is  broadening 
rapidly  —  we  might 
spend  a  few  moments 
discussing  the  sketch- 
ing of  ruined  castles 
and  old  houses,  which 
so  often  form  an  ex- 
cuse for  an  excursion 
or  a  picnic,  and  of 
which  we  usually 
desire  to  carry  home 
some  little  memento 
in  the  shape  of  a 
sketch. 

Do  not  attempt 
complicated  subjects. 
If  the  ruin  is  large 
and  there  are  many 
turrets,  many  towers, 
flights  of  steps,  and 
long  passages,  choose 
a  modest  fragment. 

An  angle  of  a  wall 
against  which  twist 
the    bony    stems    of 

ivy,  one  little  window  framing  a  patch  of  blue  sky,  a  morsel 

of  broken  masonry,  or  a  few  steps — any  of  these  will  give 

you  the  materials  you  need. 

154 


'^^.^il 


Fig.  75. 


A  Tree  drawn  with  a  Tv/ig 

DIPPED   IN   THE   InKPOT 


3i^^ 


^.'^.^% 


Fig.  76.   A  Silhouette  of  Treks.     Sketches  of  Ruins  154 


Sketching  Out  of  Doors 

A  ruin  invariably  presents  a  crumbling,  and  softened,  and 
somewhat  elusive  outline. 

Rough  in  the  whole  mass,  the  general  structure.  Look 
for  the  highest  point,  compare  the  position  of  each  thing 
with  that  point,  then,  having  settled  on  the  principal  forms, 
look  for  the  darkest  dark  and  brightest  light.  Try  to  give  an 
impression  of  the  roughened  surface.  Draw  the  near  shapes 
with  care.  If  you  sketch  the  masonry  in  the  foreground  with 
accuracy,  then  the  parts  that  lie  farther  away  can  be  more 
slightly  drawn.  The  little  bit  of  knowledge  acquired  by 
sketching  something  with  care  has  a  very  solid  value.  Young 
sketchers  faced  with  picturesque  ruins  are  often  tempted  to 
try  a  tricky  way  of  drawing. 

We  have  all  seen  ruins  '  touched  in  '  with  sharp  and  telling 
bits  of  light  and  shade  (apparently  with  ease  and  quickness), 
and  we  are  fired  with  a  desire  to  do  likewise. 

Believe  me  when  I  say  that  this  is  yet  another  pitfall  for  the 
unwary.  The  tricky  methods  of  drawing  never  advance  us  one 
step.     We  must  sketch  only  what  we  see,  and  that  with  care. 

Look  also  for  the  perspective  (another  thing  that  is  often 
ignored  when  sketching  out  of  doors),  check  the  top  angle, 
and  the  base  of  the  arch,  also  the  fragment  of  carving, 
and  the  window  in  the  wall  with  the  near  and  projecting 
masonry. 

Once  we  are  fairly  embarked  on  the  subject  of  ruined 
buildings  and  trees,  we  feel  more  capable  of  trying  real 
landscapes  on  a  larger  scale. 

As  an  introduction  to  this  more  ambitious  task,  try  your 
hand  at  thumbnail  sketches.  By  thumbnail  I  mean  tiny 
impressions  of  fairly  large  things,  small  houses,  small  trees, 
and  the  broadest  indication  of  the  curve  of  the  ground,  of 
fields,  hills,  and  hedges.  Not  scribbles,  but  honest  though 
minute  sketches  marking  the  chief  characteristics  :  the  lie 
of  the  ground,  the  position  of  the  houses,  the  shape  of  roof 
(whether  pointed  or  flat),  the  comparative  size  of  the  trees 
or  shrubs,  the  tint  or  tone  of  trees,  grass,  roof,  and  walls. 
(See  the  examples  in  Fig.  66.) 

155 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

Needless  to  say,  distance  does  lend  enchantment  to  the 
view  in  these  thumbnail  impressions,  and  they  are  far  easier 
to  draw  when  seen  from  a  long  distance.  They  are  useful, 
too,  for  the  few  minutes'  wait  at  a  railway-station,  or  the 
short  space  of  time  spent  at  places  when  motoring.  We  can 
seize  on  a  few  of  the  salient  or  chief  characteristics  of  the 
landscape  and  jot  down  tiny  little  pictures  of  houses  and 
trees,  hills  and  valleys,  cliff-end  and  sea.  The  concentra- 
tion necessary  for  these  sketches  will  help  us  to  grasp  the 
chief  characteristics  of  larger  sketches. 

A  barn  on  the  top  of  a  sloping  field,  with  a  horse  cropping 
the  turf,  and  a  morsel  of  a  fence  is  as  simple  and  direct  a 
subject  as  one  could  find.  Begin  by  sketching  the  slope  of 
the  ground,  on  which  erect  the  shape  of  the  barn,  with  its 
pointed  roof,  then  the  upright  palings  and  short  bushes,  the 
horse  with  bent  neck  and  the  barrel  shape  of  its  rounded 
body. 

Then  as  to  the  colour.  A  soft  yellow  light  pervades  sky, 
barn,  grass,  and  horse,  and  on  this  float  the  rounded  misty 
shapes  of  the  grey  clouds.  The  golden-brown  roof  is  touched 
with  cooler  grey  shadows  on  the  near  side,  and  the  grass 
mingles  with  the  reddish  soil,  something  the  same  tint  as  the 
barn.  The  hedge  is  olive  deepening  to  brown,  and  the  flank 
and  neck  of  the  horse  is  a  richer  brown  and  olive  sharpened 
with  darker  tints. 

Light  and  shade  out  of  doors  is  often  most  bewildering  to 
the  young  student.  The  light  is  suffused,  the  air  is  clean 
and  penetrating,  shadows  flicker  and  change. 

Before  beginning  a  sketch  try  to  decide  on  the  most  de- 
finite bits  of  light  and  shade.  Make  a  thumbnail  sketch  in 
the  comer  of  your  book  if  you  will,  in  pencil  or  charcoal. 
Say  to  yourself,  "  The  sun  was  out,  the  rays  shone  from 
that  particular  angle."  Should  you  find  the  shadows  and 
rays  vanishing  before  the  approach  of  large  clouds,  wait 
till  the  clouds  pass.  If,  instead  of  passing,  more  clouds 
appear,  then  begin  another  sketch,  for  those  clouds  change 
the  whole  effect  of  the  landscape.  And  how  much  they 
156 


Fi^-.  77.    A  Si-\iri.K  La.mi.-m'apk 


156 


Sketching  Out  of  Doors 

change  it  can  be  proved  by  referring  to  your  thumbnail 
sketch. 

Sketching  on  the  seashore  raises  a  fresh  crop  of  difficulties 
and  delights. 

Boats  are  not  easy  things  to  draw  when  lying  on  the 


Fig.  78.   On  the  Seashore 

beach.     "  And  that  is  the  reason,"  Audrey  explains,  "  why 
I  prefer  to  draw  them  in  the  water." 

Audrey  is  wily,  but  she  doesn't  altogether  avoid  her  diffi- 
culties.    If  we  are  spared  drawing  the  curve  of  the  keel  seen 


Fig.  79.  The  Shape  that  is  hidden  by  the  Waves 


when  the  boat  is  exposed  on  the  pebbles,  there  is  all  the 
rigging  to  lead  us  astray  when  the  boat  is  in  the  water. 

Moreover,  we  must  know  something  about  the  shape  that 
is  hidden  by  the  waves.  As  it  is  necessary  to  know  the 
shape  of  the  limbs  covered  by  the  clothes,  and  the  branches 
covered  with  the  leaves,  so  is  it  essential  that  we  should 
know  something  of  the  build  of  the  boat. 

Should  our  artistic  eye  be  attracted  by  the  rich  tints  of 

157 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

the  sails  of  fishing  smacks  or  long-shore  boats,  we  must  be 
careful  not  to  neglect  the  rigging  and  shape  of  the  sails. 

I  have  a  distinct  remembrance  of  five  drawings  by  five 
little  ladies  of  a  fishing  smack  with  sails  exactly  the  same 
shape  fore  and  aft.  Compare  one  sail  with  another  sail. 
Begin  by  drawing  the  long  sweeping  curves  of  the  hull,  and 
then  the  angle  of  the  mast.  With  these  two  facts  carefully 
noted  you  won't  go  quite  so  far  astray. 

A  beach,  however,  has  a  lot  to  offer  besides  the  boats. 

There  are  the  capstans,  and  the  high  black  houses  where 


Fig.  80.  Study  of  a  Boat 

the  fishermen  store  their  nets  and  tackle,  and  the  lobster 
pots,  and  the  heaps  of  coiled  ropes.  There  are  the  rocks 
with  their  brown  and  mossy  sides  reflected  in  limpid  pools  ; 
crabs;  shells  of  all  descriptions;  starfishes  most  obligingly 
lazy  and  quiet ;  sprays  of  deliciously  coloured  seaweed ; 
sand  castles,  wooden  spades,  and  scarlet  buckets. 

The  beach  is  full  of  interesting  little  colour  subjects.  The 
air  is  clear,  and  the  water  reflects  the  light ;  bright  caps  and 
frocks,  sails  and  seaweed,  and  the  striped  tents  and  scarlet 
buckets  are  all  most  attractive. 

All  our  former  discussions,  our  thumbnail  sketches,  pencil 
and  chalk  studies,  and  small  landscapes  in  colour  will  render 
sketching  by  the  seashore  easier. 

If  we  wish  to  sketch  people  sitting  on  the  beach,  or  children 
158 


h^ 


\n 


"^"^"is  4§a 


."'*  3f.-^ 


Fitf.  si.    On  tiik  Hkach 


i^S 


Sketching  Out  of  Doors 

playing,  we  shall  have  to  be  very  rapid.  It  is  wisest  to  sketch 
the  stationary  things  first.  If  we  desire  to  sketch  Mollie  or 
Rosemary  by  their  tent  or  climbing  the  breakwater  or  rocks, 
do  not  let  us  waste  time  waiting.  Sketch  a  bit  of  the  tent, 
the  breakwater  or  rock,  then  when  Mollie  or  Rosemary 
appears  you  will  be  prepared.  Also,  and  I  speak  feelingly 
on  the  subject,  they  may  dart  away  before  you  have  painted 
the  colour  of  their  shoes,  belt,  or  even  dress — if  so,  write  the 
colour  tint  in  the  margin. 

But  with  the  distant  promontory  and  the  glossy  procession 
of  rocks  stretching  into  the  sea,  you  will  happily  find  some- 
thing at  rest.  Only,  remember  this,  never  begin  a  sketch 
in  the  morning  and  finish  the  same  at  night.  The  light  will 
be  wholly  different.  Sketch  a  morning  scene  by  morning,  a 
noonday  scene  at  noonday.  If  you  have  not  done  all  you 
desired  to  do  during  those  periods  of  time,  put  the  sketch 
away  until  those  hours  recur.  It  is  highly  improbable  that 
you  will  see  the  same  effect  again,  for  that  is  at  once  the 
bane  and  delight  of  sketching — its  never-ending  variety. 


159 


CHAPTER  XIII 

How  to  Catch  a  Likeness 

THE  word  '  portraiture  '  has  an  awe-inspiring  sound. 
Portraiture   is   something  that   we   may   possibly 
attain  in  the  far-off  days  when  we  are  grown  up. 

Granted  that  the  art  of  portraiture  may  be  too  ambitious 
for  our  humble  pencil,  yet  there  is  every  reason  why  we  should 
train  our  eye,  hand,  and  brain  in  the  devious  ways  of  catching 
a  likeness.  It  will  be  a  big  help  to  the  portrait-painting  of 
the  future. 

The  gift  of  catching  a  likeness,  of  transposing  a  recog- 
nizable drawing  of  a  face  to  paper,  is  a  very  wayward  gift. 
It  does  not  follow  that  because  we  are  artistic  we  shall  have 
a  jiair  for  portraiture. 

There  are  some  people — far  from  artistic — who  can  catch  a 
likeness. 

There  are  many  amateurs  (by  which  I  mean  those  artists 
who  do  not  take  the  artistic  profession  seriously)  who  have 
a  wonderful  facility  for  drawing  a  likeness  ;  also  there  are 
very  clever  artists  to  whom  the  gift  of  portraiture  is  denied. 
All  of  which  demonstrates  that  this  peculiar  gift  lies  apart 
from  other  branches  of  art. 

Whether  we  have  this  gift,  or  whether  we  have  merely  a 
feeling  that  we  should  like  '  to  try  our  hand  '  at  sketching  a 
likeness,  it  is  our  plain  duty  to  make  a  few  efforts,  for  it 
stimulates  three  very  valuable  qualities :  it  promotes  care- 
fulness, accuracy,  and  reasoning. 

Now  we  might  consider  a  few  methods  by  which  we  may 
become  proficient  in  this  very  elusive  art. 

Possibly  at  some  time  of  your  life  you  have  amused  your- 
self with  sketching  the  shadows  of  your  friends.  You  placed 
160 


How  to  Catch  a  Likeness 


a  candle  or  some  other  light  at  such  an  angle  that  the  shadow 
of  the  profile  was  thrown  on  a  sheet  of  paper  pinned  on  a 
wall ;  then  by  tracing  the  outline  of  the  shadow  with  a  soft 
pencil,  or  piece  of 
charcoal,  you  secured 
an  outline  sketch. 
The  size  of  the  pic- 
ture is  its  disadvant- 
age. Who  wants  a 
life-sized  outline  of 
even  their  dearest 
and  their  best  ? 

But  in  a  sizable, 
careful  little  outline 
drawing  of  a  friend's 
features  filled  with 
black  ink  or  paint 
we  have  an  old- 
fashioned  method  of 
portraiture — the  sil- 
houette. 

Silhouette  drawing 
is  not  such  a  difficult 
art  as  it  might  at 
first  appear.  It  is, 
moreover,  an  excel- 
lent stepping-stone  to 
the  broad  highway  of 
portraiture.  And  it 
has  two  very  popular  advantages :  it  is  quickly  done,  and  it 
is  pleasing  when  done. 

Armed  with  a  smooth  card  or  a  firm-surfaced  paper,  a 
pencil,  a  fine  brush  or  pen,  ivory  black  paint  or  black  drawing 
ink,  we  have  all  that  is  necessary. 

Ask  your  model  to  move  his  head  aside  till  he  presents  his 
profile,  then  take  up  your  pencil  and  lightly  sketch  head, 
face,  features,  neck,  and  hair. 

L  161 


Fig.  82.  A  Light  Sketch  and  a  Silhouette 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

Look  critically  at  the  proportions  of  your  drawing.  Com- 
pare your  sketch  with  your  model.  Is  the  face  the  right 
size  ?  Does  the  forehead  creep  too  high  to  the  crest  of  the 
head  ?  Examine  the  curve  from  the  brow  to  the  bridge  of 
the  nose.  Is  it  sufficiently  indented  ?  Carefully  note  the 
length  of  the  nose,  the  shape  and  projection  of  the  upper  and 
lower  lip,  the  curve  of  the  chin,  and  the  moulding  beneath 
the  jaw. 

Do  not  make  the  neck  too  thick.  You  can  add  bulk  to 
your  silhouette,  but  you  can't  take  it  away.  Carefully  note 
the  shape  of  the  head. 

There  are  various  methods  of  '  finishing  '  the  neck.  For 
our  first  essay  the  neck  may  be  finished  in  a  sloping  curve 
beginning  at  the  nape  of  the  neck  and  sloping  thence  in  a 
sharp  curve  downward  to  the  forepart  of  the  throat. 

Always  sketch  the  shape  and  position  of  the  eye,  also  the 
nostril,  ear,  jaw,  and  corner  of  the  mouth.  This  will  help 
to  check  proportions  and  keep  the  features  in  place. 

Having  drawn  the  general  shape  of  the  coiled,  floating,  or 
clipped  locks,  the  stubby  moustache  or  beard,  we  shall  find 
it  easy  to  indicate  the  shape  and  character  by  the  fine  hairs 
projecting  beyond  the  outline. 

When  the  outline  is  ready  to  be  filled  with  ink  or  paint 
(and  supposing  that  paint  will  be  your  most  likely  medium) 
mix  a  good  quantity  of  ivory  black  or  sepia  on  the  palette, 
and  lay  it  on  smoothly  and  evenly. 

The  silhouette  filled  and  the  outline  firm  and  clear,  you 
will  note  any  projection  of  hair,  frills,  collar,  lace,  and 
ribbons.     Draw  these  with  a  delicately  fine  line. 

A  word  about  the  size  of  your  silhouette.  Do  not  make 
the  drawing  too  large,  but,  on  the  other  hand,  do  not  aim  at 
making  it  minute.  If  you  sketch  it  no  larger  than  a  postage- 
stamp  you  will  find  it  difficult  to  correct  in  the  early  stages  ; 
and  if  you  draw  it  very  large  you  will  lose  the  dainty  effect 
that  is  the  chief  charm  of  the  silhouette.  One  and  a  half 
inches  high  is  a  fairly  reasonable  size. 

If  you  are  not  satisfied  with  your  first  attempts  at  a 
162 


How  to  Catch  a  Likeness 


silhouette,  do  not  despair,  try  again.  Make  another  start — 
sketch  a  fresh  model.  Do  not  expect  to  succeed  without 
practice,  for  remember  you  are  up  against  a  difficult  problem. 
You  are  not  merely  trying  to  depict  '  a  nose,'  '  a  face,'  '  a 
head  '  ;   but  a  very  special  nose,  face,  and  head. 

Moreover,  there  is  another  excellent  reason  for  many 
attempts.  There  is  no  satisfactory 
method  of  correcting  a  silhouette. 
If  we  make  a  false  step  and  give 
too  long  a  nose,  too  thick  lips,  too 
square  a  jaw,  we  cannot  afterward 
amend  our  mistake.  It  is  of  course 
possible  to  take  a  brushful  of  thick 
white  paint  and  fine  down  our 
outline.  We  can  also  use  a  scraper 
(a  very  sharp  knife)  and  scrape 
at  the  surface  of  the  paper.  But 
neither  method  will  be  satisfactory. 
The  pure,  hard,  sharp  outline  is 
the  hall-mark  of  a  good  silhouette. 
The  one  unforgivable  sin  is  the 
ragged  edge. 

It  is  a  thrilling  moment  when 
we  can  trace  a  likeness  between 
our  model  and  our  silhouette.  And 
I  can  truthfully  say  that,  given 
a  little  patience  and  intelligent 
application,  there  is  no  reason  against,  and  every  reason  for, 
that  happy  result. 

The  drawing  of  likenesses  in  silhouette  (for  there  are  many 
other  subjects  to  which  we  can  apply  this  fascinating  little 
art — sprays  of  leaves,  birds,  or  fluffy  animals,  grotesque  and 
quaint  figures,  landscapes  of  fantastic  description,  to  quote 
but  a  few)  has  this  advantage.     It  hides  defects. 

The  double  chin,  the  dragged  lines  of  eye,  mouth,  and 
nostril,  the  wrinkles  of  forehead  and  face,  the  untidy  head 
of  hair — all  are  softened  and  veiled  with  the  kindly  brush. 

163 


Fig.  83.  A  Spray  of  Leaves 
IN  Silhouette 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

Once  your  interest  is  aroused  in  portraiture  the  art  of  the 
silhouette  will  not  wholly  satisfy  your  cravings.  It  is  a 
charming  but,  it  must  be  admitted,  a  limited  art. 

Now  we  are  prepared  to  pass  on  to  more  ambitious  sub- 
jects, and  here  I  must  offer  a  word  of  advice,  for  I  do  not 
want  to  make  this  difficult  business  of  portraiture  unneces- 
sarily more  difficult.  We  must  go  warily.  The  fascinating 
task  of  drawing  likenesses  is  sometimes  apt  to  give  offence. 

"  That — my  portrait !  "  said  an  old  lady,  ruefully  regard- 
ing a  drawing  of  mine.  "  Ah,  well  !  " — following  up  with  a 
sigh — "  I  was  considered  rather  nice-looking  in  my  day." 
The  sad  result  was  that  the  old  lady  refused  to  pose  again, 
and  the  rest  of  the  holiday  was  wasted,  so  far  as  further 
endeavours  at  sketching  a  likeness  were  concerned. 

It  is  just  as  well  to  bear  in  mind  what  was  written  of 
Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  the  great  portrait-painter  of  the 
eighteenth  century : 

His  pencil  was  striking,  resistless,  and  grand  ; 

His  manners  were  gentle,  complying,  and  bland  ; 

Still  born  to  improve  us  in  every  part. 

His  pencil  our  faces,  his  manner  our  heart.  ■<* 

Compare  our  beloved  Sir  Joshua  with  the  Chinese  painter 
who,  like  most  Chinese  artists,  was  excellent  at  copying  a 
likeness,  defect  and  blemish  complete,  and  to  whom  one  of 
his  sitters  objected  that  he  had  not  made  him  handsome 
enough.     The  painter  replied,  blandly  but  firmly  : 

"  No  hab  got  handsome  face,  how  can  hab  handsome 
picture  ?  " 

Supposing  that  it  is  your  intention  to  sketch  the  likeness 
of  a  person  who  has  what  is  sometimes  called  an  unfor- 
tunate profile,  you  should  not  pitch  on  the  particular  position 
of  a  profile  for  choice. 

The  pencil  says  that  my  model  has  a  small  eye,  snub  nose, 
receding  chin,  and  it  records  these  facts  remorselessly.     It 
may  not  mean  to  be  unkind.     But  the  outline  is  such  and 
down  it  goes. 
164 


Fig.  84.    Expression  in  Portraits 


How  to  Catch  a  Likeness 

In  such  a  case  a  three-quarter  view,  or  even  a  full  face 
would  be  wiser — and  kinder. 

Some  people  run  away  with  the  idea  that  portraiture  is 
merely  seeking  out  defects  and  exaggerations — but  that  is 
caricature. 

We  should  look  for  the  pleasing  characteristics.  We  do 
not,  it  is  true,  wish  to  draw  the  '  pretty  pretty  '  face — the 
chocolate-box  style  of  beauty — but  there  is  no  reason  against 
recording  pleasant  rather  than  unpleasant  facts.  It  takes  a 
very  big  man  to  rise  above  facial  defects,  and  an  Oliver 
Cromwell  to  wish  to  be  painted  '  warts  and  all.' 

We  will  presume  that  a  group  of  girls  and  boys  are  waiting 
primed  ready  to  sketch  portraits.  And  one  has  been  selected, 
or  very  good-naturedly  volunteers,  to  sit  as  a  model.  Some  one 
remarks,  not  very  politely  and  a  little  despairingly,  "  There's 
absolutely  nothing  in  Rachel  that  isn't  just  ordinary !  " 

Ordinary  ;  what  is  '  ordinary  '  ?  '  Common,  customary,' 
says  the  dictionary  (among  other  things). 

Is  Rachel  '  ordinary  '  compared  with  the  rest  ? 

Look  swiftly  from  Rachel's  lips  to  those  of  Patricia. 
Rachel's  upper  lip  is  '  ever  so  short '  compared  with  Patricia's 
rather  pouting  mouth  ;  and  her  eye — she  has  a  fine-lidded 
eye,  with  clear,  open  pupil.  John's  eye  is  slightly  hidden  by 
his  brow,  and  his  iris  is  dark.  And  compare  the  three  pairs 
of  eyebrows.  Rachel's  extend  thickly  from  the  nose  to  the 
outer  edge  of  the  eye,  Patricia's  are  thin  and  silky,  and  John's 
are  queer  little  dabs  of  hair,  one  of  which  gives  a  humorous 
twist  and  expression  to  his  face. 

Expression,  ah  ! — now  we  are  getting  to  the  root  of  this 
portrait  business.  .  .  . 

Let  us  break  off  for  a  moment. 

When  we  have  seen  a  portrait  by  a  famous  artist — or  the 
reproduction  of  one — what  lingers  most  clearly  in  our  minds  ? 
Does  not  the  expression  haunt  our  memories  ? 

To  quote  a  few  of  the  greatest  portraits  in  the  world : 
Think  of  the  gentle  austerity  of  Titian's  Doctor,  the  shy 
grace  of  Velasquez's  Baby  Princess,  the  demure  questioning 

165 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

of  Reynolds'    Strawberry   CHrl,   and    the   tragic    dignity   of 
Rembrandt's  Old  Woman. 

I  doubt  if  you  could  give  the  faintest  description  of  the 
features  of  one  of  these  portraits. 

And  now  let  us  look  at  our  portrait  of  Rachel  or  Margery. 

That  may  be  Margery's  eye,  nose,  mouth,  chin,  hair,  and 
ear,  but  if  we  have  missed  Margery's  mischievous  look,  the 
wicked  twinkle  in  her  bright  eye,  the  twitching  curve  of  her 
lips,  and  the  jaunty  tilt  of  her  glossy  head  ;  in  short,  if  we 
have  not  captured  her  expression,  Margery's  portrait  is  no 
portrait  at  all. 

When  we  draw  likenesses  we  must  not  labour  first  with 
one  feature  and  then  with  another,  but  try  to  grasp  every- 
thing together. 

We  begin  by  noting  any  peculiarity,  such  as  the  poise  of 
the  head  on  the  shoulders,  afterward  roughing  out  the  angles 
of  the  features,  or  the  arrangement  of  large  masses  such  as 
a  woman's  hair  or  a  man's  beard ;  then  we  confine  ourselves 
to  the  drawing  of  the  features. 

There  is  no  sense  in  racing  along  if  by  nature  you  are  a 
plodder.     We  must  all  '  gang  our  ain  gait.' 

Personally,  however,  I  have  a  feeling,  or  rather  a  con- 
viction, that  if  I  cannot  capture  something  of  the  likeness 
in  the  earliest  stages  it  will  always  elude  me. 

From  the  very  first  attack  the  angle  of  the  head,  the 
placing  of  the  neck  on  the  shoulders,  the  cock  of  the  eye, 
the  droop  of  the  lip. 

There  is  another  point  to  bear  in  mind.  Do  not  get  too 
easily  discouraged.  Don't  be  depressed  if  your  efforts  do 
not  gain  immediate  success.  You  must  try  many  times 
before  you  can  hope  to  be  proficient. 

After  all,  you  do  not  expect  to  play  a  sonata  of  Beethoven's, 
or  to  write  a  thesis  on  an  abstruse  subject,  or  to  compose  an 
exquisite  lyric — without  practice. 

And  remember  too  that  you  are  in  search  of  the  unex- 
pected.    It  is  your  business  to  find  and  record  facts  usually 
unnoticed  by  persons  who  are  not  artists. 
166 


Fig.  85.  Likenesses 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

Naturally  some  people  are  more  easy  to  draw  than  others. 
Those  with  marked  characteristics  are  the  easiest  of  all.  If 
you  have  any  choice  in  the  matter,  choose  some  one  with 
striking  features,  the  drawing  of  which  you  cannot  miss. 

Take  your  subtle  and 
more  delicate  studies 
later. 

When  I  was  a  child 
I  was  very  fond  of 
copying  photographs 
of  celebrities  from 
papers  and  magazines 
— not  such  a  bad 
method  of  training 
the  eye  and  hand  in 
the  curious  ways  of 
catching  a  likeness. 
And  I  remember  copy- 
ing a  charming  profile 
of  a  certain  little 
princess  (her  daughter 
is  now  as  old  as  the 
picture  to  which  I 
refer),  and  her  Royal 
Highness' s  ear  was  of 
a  prodigious  size.  If 
■^  ''  some    one    looked    at 

Fig.86.  PEX-POKTBAiTO^LomsAM.  Alcott     ^^^    drawing     without 

recognizing  the  subject  I  would  say  indignantly,  "  Oh,  but 
you  must  see  who  it  is  by  the  ear !  "  That  I  knew  to  be 
right.  I  was  quite  annoyed  when  a  friend  said  with  an  air 
of  surprise,  "  But  I  have  never  noticed  the  Princess's  ear  was 
so  large ;  surely  you  are  mistaken." 

You  must  be  prepared  for  that  sort  of  criticism.  If  you 
make  it  your  business  to  observe  things  that  are  out  of  the 
way,  you  are  certain  to  meet  with  such  remarks. 

It  is  not  only  with  eyes,  nose,  ears,  mouth,  expression  that 
168 


How  to  Catch  a  Likeness 

we  must  be  observant,  but  we  must  note  and  compare  the 
little  unobtrusive  characteristics  and  traits  which  distinguish 
individuals. 

One  sits  erect,  another  lolls  in  a  languid  manner,  another 
slouches  into  awkward  attitudes.  Some  perk  up  their  chins, 
or  incline  their  heads  slightly  to  one  side.  All  of  which  are 
valuable  helps  to  the  getting  of  a  good  likeness. 

It  will  lessen  your  difficulties  if  you  remember  to  leave  a 
space  between  yourself  and  your  model.  It  is  a  sheer  im- 
possibility to  see  such  a  large  object  as  a  human  being  in 
proportion  unless  we  remove  ourselves  a  good  many  paces 
away. 

If  you  place  yourself  close  to  your  model,  as  young  artists 
often  do,  you  will  see  the  top  of  the  head,  the  top  of  the 
shoulder,  the  upper  part  of  the  body,  and  the  feet.  You  will 
have  the  curves  of  the  features  very  much  accentuated,  and 
it  will  be  exceedingly  difficult  to  get  the  whole  picture  '  in 
drawing.' 

Artists  when  painting  full-length  portraits  invariably  pose 
their  models  a  good  distance  away  from  their  easels,  and 
sometimes  the  models  are  placed  on  a  low  platform.  We  can 
dispense  with  platforms,  but  we  cannot  dispense  with  distance. 

Naturally,  when  drawing  the  head  you  can  sit  near  your 
model  with  safety.  But  when  the  object  is  large  then  you 
must  move  away  until  you  get  a  good  and  comprehensive 
view. 

I  would  not  discourage  you  from  drawing  people  who 
happen  to  be  near  if  you  feel  a  strong  desire  to  attempt  it. 
Do  not  resist  the  impulse  to  sketch  some  one  who  is  bending 
over  the  same  table  as  yourself,  for  example,  but  bear  in 
mind  that  you  are  close  to  your  model  and  make  allowances. 

It  may  be  that  you  are  not  able  to  procure  many  sitters, 
that  you  live  where  there  are  very  few  people,  and  your 
opportunities  of  observation  are  therefore  very  restricted. 
That  need  not  prevent  you  from  drawing  portraits.  You 
must  study  the  few.  Even  the  greatest  artists  have  contented 
themselves  at  times  with  a  moderate  range  of  subjects.     And 

169 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

some  of  the  finest  portraits  are  the  portraits  of  the  artist's 
relations  and  friends.  Gainsborough  painted  his  own 
daughters.  Some  of  Rubens'  best  portraits  are  those  of  his 
wife  Helena  ;  Rembrandt  was  for  ever  painting  himself,  and 
his  clever  rubicund  face  eyes  us  shrewdly  from  many  a 
canvas  ;  and  there  is  the  painting  of  Van  Dyck  himself 
with  the  sunflower. 

And  so  we  narrow  our  portrait-drawing  down  to  ourselves. 
If  you  are  driven  to  the  drawing  and  painting  of  yourself 
(and  it  is  always  easier  to  draw  other  people,  because  one 
cannot  back  away  from  one's  self  and  so  get  a  good  '  general ' 
view),  and  you  are  presumably  standing  before  a  looking- 
glass,  remember  this — you  are  drawing  yourself  not  actually 
as  you  are  but  a  size  smaller. 

A  mirror  reduces  and  makes  us  appear  smaller,  and  this 
reduction  forces  the  little  things  upon  us  at  the  expense  of 
the  more  important. 

It  is  very  easy  to  prove  this.  Stand  a  few  paces  away 
from  the  looking-glass  and  ask  some  one  to  dab  with  a  colour- 
brush  the  reflection  of  your  head,  the  crest  of  your  head  and 
the  tip  of  your  chin,  and  measure  this  space  with  the  brush 
against  your  own  face.  You  will  find  that  the  looking-glass 
face  is  about  a  third  the  size  of  your  own. 

The  art  of  catching  a  likeness,  then,  brings  us  to  this 
point.  We  must  first  of  all  have  good  ground-work.  We 
must  practise  drawing  faces  and  features  of  various  people 
in  various  positions. 

We  must  draw  with  knowledge,  not  guessing  at  things, 
sketching  at  random  and  trusting  to  luck. 

We  must  be  prepared  to  catch  the  fleeting  look ;  we  must 
hold  ourselves,  as  it  were,  on  the  very  tiptoe  of  expectancy 
for  the  smile,  the  glance,  the  pout,  the  thoughtful  or  mirthful 
expression. 

A  line  well  expressed  will  send  our  hopes  soaring  high,  and 
a  line  faulty  and  wrong  will  dash  all  those  hopes  to  the 
ground.     Never    be    daunted    by  mistakes,    but    take    your 
courage  in  both  hands  and  persevere. 
170 


CHAPTER  XIV 

Action  and  Composition 

WHEN  I  was  very  young  I  cherished  intense  admira- 
tion for  a  certain  httle  friend  who  was  fond  of 
drawing  birds — not  single  studies  of  birds,  but 
birds  in  flight.  Flicks  flick,  flick — so  many  swift  touches  of 
the  pencil  and  the  birds  sprang  into  sight,  crowds  of  little 


Fig.  87.  Birds  in  Flight 

birds  with  curved  wings  against  solid  chunks  of  rolling 
clouds.  Have  you  not  drawn  them  yourself  ?  Have  you 
not  sometimes  watched  the  birds  crossing  the  sky  and  tried 
to  follow  their  flight  with  a  pencil  ? 

Fishes  are  not  so  easily  studied,  but  sometimes  they  can 
be  observed  in  tanks,  or  in  the  wonderful  Nature  pictures  of 

171 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

the  '  movies,'  and  fishes  swimming  in  water  bear  resemblance 
to  birds  flying  in  the  air. 

We  are  inclined  to  neglect  our  opportunities  of  studying 


Fig.  88.   Pattern  formed  by  Children  playing  a 
Round  Game 

things  in  action.  Now  that  most  of  us  can  see  in  the  cine- 
matographs things  moving  as  they  never  (seemingly)  moved 
before,  we  should  be  all  the  better  primed  for  this  very 

fascinating  study. 
ffi  \         When  crows  caw  and  circle  round  tall  trees, 

I  /'I     or  pigeons   rise   in   great   sweeps  and   eddies 

from  the  ground,  it  seems  as  if  they  were 
weaving  patterns  against  the  sky,  and  if  each 
little  beak  held  a  gossamer  thread  there  would 
be  an  exquisite  pattern  floating  against  the 
clouds. 

Given  sufficient  motives  or  reasons  for 
gathering  groups  together,  then  the  result 
must  be  patterns  shaping  and  reshaping. 

Consider — from  this  particular  point  of  view 
— a  group  of  children  playing  a  round  game, 
a  ring  of  swaying  bodies  from  which  one  or 
two  units  separate  and  dart  to  and  fro,  inter- 
Patte'rn  FORMED  wcaviug  aud  making  another  variation  of  the 
BY  A  Country     same  shape. 

Or  old  country  dances  and  games  in  which 
two  long  rows  of  people  face  each  other,  and  become  linked 
by  individuals  coming  from  opposite  ends  and  meeting  and 
dancing  in  the  centre. 

Or  again  :   a  crumb  dropped  in  a  bowl  of  water  containing 
fish,  and  tiny  glistening  bodies  moving  in  star-like  shapes. 
172 


Fiff.  89 


<rr\ 


Fitj.  90.    Ai'iiiiN  AMI  Riniii.M   in  ( 'mmi'iki  tion 


Action  and  Composition 

Birds  in  the  air  and  fishes  in  the  water  form  shapes  by  the 
grouping  of  their  bodies. 

Children  chasing  a  butterfly  or  a  ball ;    children  playing 


Fig.  91.  Pattern  formed  by  the  Movement  of  Fish  in  the  Water 

with  kites  ;  children  rushing  along  a  flat  surface  bowling 
their  hoops  ;  a  flock  of  startled  geese  rising  from  a  marshy 
mere ;  a  cluster  of  grubbing 
sparrows  among  the  puddles 
of  a  muddy  street ;  a  flock  of 
sheep  chased  by  a  dog ;  a 
slow  procession  of  cows  mov- 
ing along  a  lane — all  and  each 
move  in  a  certain  pattern. 

You  will  ask,  is  it  possible 
for  anything  to  move  with- 
out making  some  continuous 
pattern  ?  The  answer  is  that 
there  is  no  end  to  movement. 
We  dance,  and  our  arms  and 
legs  follow  the  curves  and 
actions  of  our  body.  We 
run,  and  the  same  thing 
happens  in  a  different  degree. 
The  dog  wags  his  tail,  not  in  one,  but  in  many  continuous 
movements. 

173 


Fig.  92.   We  Dance 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

When  we  wish  to  plan  a  drawing  or  painting  we  must  put 

this  sense  of  movement  into  our  picture.     Obviously  our 

figures  and  objects  will  be 
stationary,  but  there  must  be 
a  sense  of  movement  that 
carries  the  eyes  pleasantly 
throughout  the  whole.  We 
must  make  patterns,  and 
evolve  action  or  rhythm  be- 
tween each  object. 

If  we  pick  up  a  book,  at- 
tracted by  the  first  page  or  the 
first  few  chapters,  and  we  find 
that  there  is  nothing  further 
to  hold  our  interest,  what  do 
we  do  but  discard  the  book  ? 
So  it  is  with  a  picture.  We 
must  arrest  the  eye.     But  we 

must  also  hold  the  interest  pleasantly  within  the  picture. 

We  must  not  put  something  down  which  says  "  Stop  !  "  and 

then  treat   the   subject  in  such  a   barbarous  manner  that 

the  eye  wanders  dis- 
satisfied out   of  the 

picture.      We  must, 

like  the  writer  of  the 

book,  give  something 

more    than    a    first 

attraction.     Take  as 

an     example     the 

simplest  instance, 

that    of   a    sheet    of 

paper  containing  an 

upright  line. 

If    we    have    one 


Fig.  93.   We  Run 


Fig.  94.   Improving  an  Empty  Space 


sharp  line  in  the  centre  and  no  more,  the  space  appears 
empty  on  either  side,  but  add  a  few  natural  lines  and  the 
space  is  pleasantly  broken. 
174 


Action  and  Composition 

If  we  sketch  a  cottage  on  a  plain  and  put  it  down  squarely 
on  our  paper,  the  cottage  in  the  centre  with  a  tree  on  either 

side  and  a  stretch  of _ 

flat  country  beyond, 
how  foolish  and 
empty  the  flat  plain 
appears  ! 

But  shift  the  cot- 
tage to  one  side, 
and  search  for  some 
little  '  incident '  (or 
action),  though  it  is 
but  a  pathway,  to 
impart     an     interest  Fig.  95.  An  '  Empty  '  Picture 

to  the  larger  space. 

Then  the  sketch  becomes  at  once  more  satisfactory — it 
holds  the  eye.  Firstly,  we  are  attracted  by  the  cottage 
and    trees   massed    pleasantly    together;    secondly,   by    the 


Fig.  96.   An  Interesting  Rearrangement 


pathway,  which  brings  the  eye  back  again  to  the  centre  of 
the  picture. 

Nature  has  her  compositions ;  we  merely  select  from  them 
with  a  little  care.  We  do  not  aim — the  Fates  forbid  ! — at 
rearranging  Nature.  But  we  do  aim  at  choosing  a  happy 
time,  or,  rather,  sketching  a  good  subject  at  a  happy  moment. 

175 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

Landscape,   figure,   domestic  pictures,   historical  scenes — 
whatever  the  subject  demanding  our  attention — this  problem 


Fig.  97.  A  Single  Figure  Poorly  Composed 

arises — ^what  arrangement,  plan,  or  movement  will  you  give 
your  picture  ? 

Let  us  assume  for  the  sake  of  argument  that  you  wish  to 


Fig.  98.  The  Effect  of  Composition 

draw  the  single  figure  of  a  girl.  We  sketch  her  in  a  simple 
position,  standing  with  her  arms  to  her  sides,  and  more  bulk  at 
the  head  than  the  base  ;  how  silly  she  looks — how  meaning- 
176 


Action  and  Composition 

less !  But  give  some  reason  for  this  particular  picture— 
the  flowing  of  a  scarf,  the  widening  of  the  design  at  the  base, 
an  uplifted  arm  holding  a  basket,  clouds  floating  behind  her 
head,  and  sloping  banks  on  either  side.  Then  the  eye  is 
caught  first  by  the  central  figure,  next  by  the  shawl,  arm, 
clouds,  and  led  at  last  to  the  banks  and  trees. 

Possibly  you  might  object  to  that  particular  pose.  You 
want  something  quieter  and  more 
restrained ;  in  fact,  you  wish  to 
keep  to  the  original  pose  of  the 
slim  upright  figure.  Very  well;  but 
would  it  not  be  wise  to  place  your 
figure  in  an  upright  space,  and  in- 
troduce either  a  misty  effect  with 
delicate  lines,  or  else  something 
that  will  help  your  figure  ? 

I  have  seen  it  stated  that  arrang- 
ing '  pictures '  is  a  very  different 
affair  from  arranging  simple  studies 
of  '  ordinary '  subjects ;  that  one 
could  not  possibly  apply  the  same 
ideas  to  both. 

But  this  is  a  false  notion,  and 
precisely  where  many  people  go 
wrong. 

After  all  is  said  and  done,  your  so-called  '  ordinary '  sub- 
jects, your  pots  and  pans,  your  flowers  and  books,  may  be 
the  subjects  in  which  you  excel.  For  everything  to  which 
we  direct  our  attention  should  result  in  a  picture,  must  result 
in  a  picture.  It  may  be  a  bad  picture  if  we  do  not  take  the 
laws  of  Nature  into  consideration,  but  a  picture  nevertheless 
it  will  be. 

We  will  take  the  subject  of  three  pots,  one  large  and  two 
of  a  medium  size. 

These  we  place  in  a  row,  the  large  pot  in  the  centre  and 
the  two  smaller  pots  on  either  side  (Fig.  100). 

You  can  see  for  yourself  that  this  is  an   unsatisfactory 
M  177 


Fig.  99 
Another  Arrangement 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

arrangement.     The  eye  lands  on  the  central  object  and  then 
slides  out  of  the  picture.     Better  to  group  the  pots  together 


Fig.  100.  A  Group  of  Pots 

in   a  less   mathematical  manner,  making  a  more   irregular 
pattern  (Fig.  101). 

Had  the  two  small  pots  been  of  different  heights,  the  first 
arrangement  would  have  balanced  itself  better. 

Or,  if  we  strongly  desire  an  oblong 
instead  of  an  upright  composition, 
we  could  place  two  of  the  pots  to- 
gether and  the  third  a  space  apart, 
linked  by  a  fragment  of  ribbon,  a 
feather,  a  spray  of  leaves  (Fig.  102). 
The  study  of  a  simple  subject, 
such  as  a  flower  with  some  leaves,  is 
an  easy  introduction  to  composition. 
First  choose  an  oblong,  circular, 
or  square  space,  and  say  to  your- 
self that  in  that  space  you  will 
sketch  the  flowers  or  the  leaves. 
Try  to  fill  the  space  pleasantly. 
The  word  '  fill '  must  be  taken 
with  reservation.  I  do  not  mean  that  you  should  aim  at 
crowding  a  varied  number  of  flowers  or  leaves  together,  but 
at  arranging  a  spray,  a  very  slender  spray  with  a  few  leaves, 
and  selecting  its  characteristics, 
178 


Fig.  101.   An  Upright 
Composition 


Action  and  Composition 

Having  sketched  your  study  with  pencil  or  brush,  consider 
it  well.  Is  the  composition  lop-sided  ?  Have  you  crowded 
too  much  into  one  place  ?  Have  you  left  a  space  crying 
aloud  for  some  attention,  though  it  l)e  but  a  few  short  strokes 
of  the  pencil  or  brush  ? 

Turn  your  drawing  upside  down.  Look  at  the  picture  as 
a  pattern,  regardless  of  other  interest,  and  try  to  consider  it 
as  such.  Or,  again,  collect  a  number  of  small  objects,  a 
few  vases,  ornaments,  shells,  ribbons,  books,  hats,  balls, 
gloves,  candles  (and 
candle-shades),  and,  ar- 
ranging those  which 
harmonize  together  in 
groups,  make  swift 
sketches  merely  for  the 
sake  of  arranging 
patterns,  of  practising 
composition. 

Whether  we  wish  to 
push  on  our  studies  and 
become  eventually  pro- 
fessional   artists,    or 

whether  we  only  intend  to  amuse  ourselves  by  sketching  now 
and  again,  we  shall  certainly  have  to  give  attention  to  these 
considerations. 

If  you  are  a  professional  artist,  the  space  that  you  intend 
to  fill  with  pen  or  pencil  bulks  very  largely  on  your  horizon. 
If  you  illustrate  stories  for  magazines,  or  for  books,  then  the 
arrangement,  or  composition,  demands  a  great  deal  of 
thought.  The  editor  or  publisher  specifies  the  number  of 
square  inches  allotted  for  your  picture,  and  it  is  by  no  means 
an  easy  task  to  fill  that  space  satisfactorily. 

If  portraiture  is  your  special  forte,  then  it  is  essential  to 
arrange  the  composition  so  that  it  fills  the  canvas  and  paper 
pleasantly.  Sometimes  I  have  seen  portraits  arranged  with 
so  little  care  that  the  unfortunate  subjects  seem  to  be  slip- 
ping out  of  the  picture. 

179 


Fig.  102.   An  Oblong  Composition 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

The  biggest  spaces  should  be  given  to  the  most  important 
part  of  the  picture. 

Several  young  artists  gathered  together  would  find  it 
helpful  to  enter  into  a  friendly  competition  in  a  particular 
subject  to  be  drawn  in  a  specified  space.  They  would  work 
independently  and  would  eventually  compare  their  sketches 
and  discuss  the  various  points. 

It  is  remarkable  how  seldom  similar  sketches  agree.  Our 
neighbours'  interpretation  of  the  same  thing  often  arouses 
great  astonishment  in  us,  and  gives  us  much  food  for  thought. 

As  time  goes  on  our  minds  will  naturally  incline  toward 
good  composition. 

Nature's  beautiful  '  arrangements,'  her  '  composition,'  her 
'  rhythm,'  her  '  action,'  will  strike  your  eye  at  every  turn. 

A  group  of  tossing  elm-trees  against  the  clouds  and  a  few 
dark  wings  streaking  the  sky ;  a  tumble-down  shed  round 
which  cows  are  grouped,  standing  or  lying,  lazily  chewing 
the  cud  ;  a  shuffle  of  chimney-pots  against  a  city  sky  and  a 
trail  of  smoke  ;  a  boy  flying  down  a  long,  narrow  wet  street, 
with  a  bundle  of  papers  beneath  his  arm  ;  a  swan  '  floating 
double  '  past  a  tuft  of  reedy  grasses  ;  an  old  man  leaning  on 
a  thick  stick  or  with  a  bundle  on  his  back  and  climbing  a 
steep  path  ;  a  woman  sitting  under  the  light  with  her  sewing 
grouped  at  her  elbow  ;  boys  and  girls  gathered  about  a  game, 
or  fire,  or  a  gate — all  these  are  natural  '  compositions,'  and 
charming  ones. 

You  might  turn  your  attention  to  advertisements,  for  these 
are  arranged  with  a  view  to  attracting  the  eye  and  gripping 
the  attention.  Look  at  them  as  so  many  patterns,  and  ask 
yourself  if  the  allotted  spaces  have  been  filled  pleasantly. 

Look  at  reproductions  of  the  Great  Masters.  The  wonder- 
ful way  in  which  these  painters  grouped  their  subjects  is  an 
education  in  itself.  The  extraordinary  simplicity  of  the 
arrangement,  action,  and  composition  will  often  surprise  you. 

The  shapes  of  some  pictures  have  given  rise  to  quaint 
legends,  and   probably  the  most  famous   of  all  is   that  of 
Raphael's  Madonna  della  Sedia,  or  Madonna  of  the  Chair, 
180 


103.    Thk  Madonna  uella  Sedia 
Raphael 

Photo  Anderiion 


180 


Action  and  Composition 

The  story  goes  that  Raphael  was  passing  through  a  village 
at  vintage  time,  and  seeing  a  mother  and  child  sitting  in  a 
doorway  was  filled  with  a  desire  to  paint  the  beautiful  group. 
The  only  materials  to  hand  were  empty  wine- vats.  On  one 
of  these  Raphael  seized,  and  began  this  picture  on  the  up- 
turned bottom  of  the  vat. 

Then  Raphael  snatched  a  half-charred  ozier  stick, 
And  on  the  wine-cask  at  that  moment  drew 
That  Child  and  Mother,  just  then  glorified 
By  the  last  sunshine's  deepest,  softest  hue. 

The  picture  is  treasured  as  one  of  the  world's  most  beautiful 
paintings,  but  whether  the  wine-vat  legend  was  invented  to 
explain  the  peculiar  shape  we  shall  never  know.  As  a  com- 
position pure  and  simple,  look  and  judge  for  yourself. 


181 


CHAPTER  XV 

Light  and  Shade 

WHAT  constitutes  light  and  shade  ?  "  is  a  question 
more  easily  asked  than  answered. 
Briefly,  all  objects  on  which  light  falls  present 
light  and  shade. 

Twist  a  piece  of  paper  into  a  cone  and  look  at  it  with  half- 
closed  eyes.  What  do  you  see  ?  One  side  is  light,  one  side 
is  dark,  where  light  and  shade  mingle  there  is  half  light  and 
half  tone. 

In  Nature  all  tones  and  tints  are  gradated.  Light  blends 
into  half  light,  half  light  into  half  tone,  half  tone  into  shade, 
dividing  and  subdividing  indefinitely. 

There  are  no  outlines  in  Nature.  '  Outlines,'  or  '  edges,' 
are  merely  names  for  the  particular  parts  thrown  into  promi- 
nence by  light  and  shade.  Certain  parts  present  sharply 
defined  shapes  ;  but  shadows  dissolve  into  light,  and  light 
dissolves  into  shadow. 

An  outline  drawing  is  a  drawing  that  represents  the  out- 
side or  extreme  edge  of  a  person  or  object,  as  the  contour  line 
in  a  map  is  the  extreme  outline  of  a  country.  There  is  no 
visible  outline  to  a  leaf,  vase,  or  hand. 

Outline  drawing  merely  represents  a  shape  without  shading. 

Therefore  when  we  speak  of  '  drawing  light  and  shade '  we 
mean  drawing  broad  masses  of  light  and  shade,  giving  the 
right  balance — neither  too  much  nor  too  little  value  to  each 
light,  each  shadow,  each  cast  shadow.  Drawing  objects  in 
light  and  shade  with  a  pencil  point  is  a  tedious  business.  It 
is  best  to  adopt  some  means  by  which  we  can  cover  the 
ground  quickly. 

There  are  many  methods  of  tackling  this  very  interesting 
182 


L.ight  and  Shade 


subject,  but  I  should  advise  (at  any  rate  as  a  beginning) 
drawing  with  black  and  white  chalk  on  a  tinted  paper  as  the 
quickest  and  most  straightforward  manner  of  drawing  broad 
masses  of  light  and  shade.  Besides,  it  has  one  great  advantage 
over  ordinary  stump  or  chalk,  charcoal,  pen  and  ink,  or  wash  : 
it  reverses  the  usual  style  of  drawing.  The  method  of  drawing 
with  light  and  dark  chalk  upon  tinted  paper  exactly  reverses 
the  method  of  drawing  with  pencil,  stump,  and  charcoal  on  a 
white  ground.  Then  we  draw  middle  and  darkest  tones  and 
leave  the  white  paper  to  express  the  light.  But  if  we  draw 
on  brown,  grey,  blue,  or  otherwise  tinted  paper,  we  draw 
the  lights  with  white  chalk,  the  shadows  with  chalk  (or 
charcoal),  and  leave  the  tinted  paper  to  express  the  middle 
or  general  tones.  By  these  means  we  build  up  the  shapes 
quickly.  We  look  for  the  shapes  of  the  lights — which 
are  too  often  undefined — no  less  than  the  shapes  of  the 
shadows. 

As  it  is  easier  to  draw  broad,  simple,  and  strong  masses 
of  light  and  shade,  choose  several  simple  objects  of  a  uniform 
colour  and  place  them  on  a  table  and  in  the  bright  and  con- 
centrated light  of  lamp,  candle,  or  (shaded)  electric  bulb. 
Bring  the  light  fairly  close  to  the  level  of  the  table.  A  small 
piece  of  candle  or  a  low  lamp  will  give  a  better,  because  a 
less  diffused,  light. 

Choose  a  white  ^gg,  a  table  napkin  in  a  white  ring,  a  white 
paper-covered  box,  a  white  paper  flower,  or  other  such 
things.  A  newspaper  folded  in  a  white  wrapper,  a  white 
cup,  or  cup  and  saucer,  white  enamel  bowl,  white  glove — all 
these  will  be  equally  suitable. 

First  ask  yourself  where  is  the  brightest  light,  and  draw 
the  shape  of  the  light  with  white  chalk.  Then  look  for  the 
darkest  shadow,  which  will  naturally  be  the  part  that  is 
farthest  away  from  the  light,  and  probably  where  the  object 
rests  on  the  ground.  Draw  the  shape  of  the  dark  shadow. 
Next  look  for  the  middle  (or  binding)  tone  and  blend  with 
white  chalk  if  in  the  light,  and  shade  with  black  chalk  if  it 
forms  part  of  the  shadow. 

183 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

When  the  surface  is  highly  polished,  as,  for  example,  on 
the  curve  of  the  napkin  ring,  there  will  be  a  '  high  light.' 

The  general  colour  of  the  tinted  paper  will  give  the  general 
prevailing  tint  of  the  background  and  the  middle  tints  of 
the  models. 

Keep  a  wary  eye  on  the  shape  of  the  shadows  cast  by  the 
various  objects.  Beginners  find  it  difficult  to  realize  that 
cast  shadows  bear  a  resemblance  to  the  objects  by  which 
they  are  cast.  Not  only  do  objects  project  their  shadows  in 
a  major  or  lesser  degree  according  to  the  distance  of  the 
light  (as  we  have  already  noted  in  perspective  diagram. 
Fig.  60),  but  they  reflect  their  chief  characteristics.  For 
example,  the  ^gg,  you  will  observe,  casts  a  smooth,  even, 
oval-shaped  shadow.  Beneath  the  shaded  objects  the  box 
and  napkin  are  roughly  sketched  with  white  chalk,  giving  a 
slight  indication  of  the  position  of  the  shadows. 

When  we  have  absorbed  some  of  the  lessons  to  be  learned 
from  drawing  objects  in  a  bright  and  artificial  light,  we 
should  proceed  to  draw  objects  in  the  more  subtle  light  of 
day. 

A  few  ordinary  models,  such  as  a  couple  of  books  and  an 
old  silver  candlestick,  placed  on  the  edge  of  a  table  will  serve 
our  purpose  very  well. 

The  books,  one  bound  in  light  cloth,  the  other  in  dark  red 
leather,  the  unlit  candle,  and  the  candlestick  present  three 
different  tones. 

Note  first  the  brightest  lights  and  the  darkest  darks. 

Seen  through  half-closed  eyes  the  silver  is  a  shimmer  of 
lights  and  soft  reflections,  and  requires  a  few  careful  strokes 
of  white  and  black  chalk,  following  the  shapes  as  closely  as 
possible,  making  good  use  of  the  definite  lights  and  shades 
on  the  rim,  the  barrel,  and  the  twisted  support.  The  light 
catches  the  edges  of  the  dark  book  ;  also  there  are  slight 
reflections  on  the  polished  table.  You  may  now  suggest  the 
middle  lights,  leaving  the  paper  itself  to  express  the  middle 
tones. 

Other  articles  will,  of  course,  serve  the  purpose.  Choose 
184 


Light  and  Shade 


a  few  near  in  shape  and  in  three  shades — hght,  dark,  and 
middle — and  place  them  in  a  simple  light  and  clear  of  their 
surroundings. 

If  you  have  not  the  ordinary  bread-knife  depicted  in  my 
drawing,  choose  another,  but  let  it  be  a  large  knife  rather 
than  a  small  one,  and  do  not  select  a  clasp-knife.  The  latter 
is  not  so  simple  in  form,  nor  so  shapely,  as  an  ordinary 
cooking-  or  carving-knife.  The  French  cooking-knife  is  an 
excellent  study  for  light  and  shade,  for  it  has  invariably  a 
straight,  smooth,  and  pointed  blade,  and  a  shapely  handle. 

The  bread-knife  presents  a  simple  plane,  a  flat  blade  and 
a  rounded  handle.  The  brightest  lights  leap  at  once  to  the 
eye  from  the  edge  of  the  blade  and  the  square-shaped  hasp. 
The  rounded  handle  throws  an  oblong  shadow ;  the  blade  also 
throws  a  de-cided  shadow  on  the  tray. 

The  wooden  handle  shares  the  tone  with  the  background. 
It  is  a  middle  tone,  and  only  requires  a  few  slight  touches 
to  '  lift '  the  light  shape  away  from  the  background.  The 
shadows  on  the  rounded  handle  are  strongly  moulded  (or 
shaped) ;  the  groove  in  the  wood  catches  both  light  and 
shade,  and  can  be  drawn  with  a  dark  streak  against  light 
strokes  of  chalk. 

The  little  Japanese  figure  of  papier  mache  in  my  drawing 
(Fig.  105)  has  a  face  almost  as  white  as  the  white  edge  of 
the  stand.  She  turns  to  the  light  and  presents  a  narrow 
upright  shape.  The  glossy  hair  has  dark  shadows,  not  quite 
so  dark  as  the  dark  folds  behind  the  sleeve  and  sash.  A 
broad  white  shadow  lies  over  the  upper  part  of  the  back. 

There  is  little  variety  of  colours  and  tints  in  these  groups. 
They  are  neutral,  with  the  exception  of  the  lady's  grey-blue 
dress,  and  the  mauve  silk  flower  in  her  hand,  and  the  small 
book  with  the  dark  crimson  cover  supporting  the  candlestick. 

And  the  objects  gathered  beneath  the  bright  artificial  light 
are  all  of  a  uniform  whiteness,  chosen  for  this  very  reason. 

Colour  confuses  the  consideration  of  tones.  Whether 
colour  represents  dark  tones  or  light  tones  depends  to  a 
great  extent  on  the  light  which  falls  upon  it. 

185 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

Naturally,  however,  rich  colours  retain  the  shadows  and 
lighter  colours  reflect  more  light. 

Look  through  half-closed  lids  (not  for  colour,  but  for  pure 
light  and  shade)  at  a  large  armchair  upholstered  in  one 
uniform  and  unpatterned  material.  Note  how  the  colour 
varies  under  the  play  of  light  and  shadow.  Cannot  you  see 
the  difference  between  the  colour  in  the  shadows  and  the 
colour  in  light  ?  And  a  contrast  between  the  back  and  the 
seat  of  the  chair,  the  tops  and  the  sides  of  the  arms,  the 
edges  of  the  arms  and  seat  and  the  edges  of  the  back  ?  The 
sofa,  settee,  and  table  covered  with  a  plain  piece  of  material 
offer  the  same  object-lessons  of  light  and  shade. 

Observe — in  a  bright  light — a  cream-coloured  jug  or  cup 
decorated  with  a  broad  band  of  pale  colour.  The  pink,  blue, 
or  yellow  band  merges  into  the  shaded  side  of  the  jug,  and  be- 
comes almost  indistinguishable  from  the  cream  surroundings. 

Place  a  pale  blue,  pink,  or  yellow  enamelled  mug,  or 
tumbler,  upon  a  white  plate  and  in  a  strong  light.  Do  you 
not  find  that  the  mug  or  tumbler — though  a  shade  darker 
than  the  white  plate — mingles  with  the  cast  shadow  thrown 
on  the  plate  ? 

The  contents  of  a  small  table — a  man's  smoking  table  no 
less  than  a  lady's  toilet  table — ^will  offer  innumerable  objects 
for  the  study  of  pure  light  and  shade.  A  cigar-box  with  its 
gilt  and  gaily  tinted  labels  is  a  very  good  object-lesson  in 
light  and  shade,  and  seen  in  a  shaded  position  the  light 
label  blends  with  the  polished  dark  wood  on  the  shadow 
side. 

A  cigarette,  like  a  cigar,  presents  a  tubular  shape,  light  on 
one  side,  dark  on  the  other.  The  gold  or  cork  tip  of  the 
cigarette  merges  into  the  shadows  of  the  shaded  side  ;  the 
crimson  and  gold  band  of  the  cigar  mingles  with  the  rich 
brown  shadows  of  the  cigar  itself. 

If  you  arrange  several  objects  of  contrasting  colour  closely 
together  and  in  the  same  light,  the  contrast  helps  to  force 
the  effect. 

Draw  a  cluster  of  purple  grapes  and  light  green  grapes 
186 


Fig.   IOC).    Light  and  Shade  on  Coloured  Objects 


186 


Light  and  Shade 


side  by  side.  The  purple  grapes  catch  the  hght  and  hold 
rich  shadows.  The  light  grapes  should  be  as  firmly  but  more 
delicately  drawn ;  they  require  light  touches  of  chalk,  and 
shadow-shapes  drawn  with  a  gentle  hand.  The  depth  and 
shade  of  the  grapes  vary  very  little.  There  is  a  slightly 
heavier  tone  beneath  the  dark  round  globules. 

A  white  or  cream  bird's  wing  leaning  against  a  dark  green 
bottle  with  a  shadow  projecting  over  the  feathers  makes 
a  very  interesting  contrast  of  light  and  shade.  Only  the 
stopper  of  the  bottle  reflects  pure  light.  The  rest  of  it  is 
submerged  into  shadow,  and,  half  closing  your  eyes,  you  will 
find  that  the  bottle  loses  itself  in  its  own  shadow  cast  on 
the  ground. 

The  whole  of  the  wing  is  a  light  tone,  the  lightest  portion 
being  that  which  is  nearest.  Draw  the  triangular  shape  with 
firm  touches  of  white  chalk,  then  shade  down  with  black 
chalk  where  the  shadow  lies.  There  is  a  rich  shadow  in 
the  foreground.  The  wing,  though  deeply  overshadowed,  still 
remains  many  shades  lighter  than  the  ground. 

If  the  bottle  and  wing  are  a  thought  too  difficult,  draw 
something  a  little  less  complicated. 

Arrange  several  objects  of  contrasting  tints  in  a  strong 
light,  either  with  or  without  a  cast  shadow  (which  is  easily 
arranged  by  intercepting  the  light  with  a  few  books,  or  a 
piece  of  cardboard).  If  it  be  a  woman's  hat  with  a  con- 
trasting plume  or  wing,  either  the  hat  should  be  dark  and 
the  feather  light,  or  vice  versa  ;  or  you  may  place  together  a 
man's  black  hat  and  a  pair  of  light  kid  gloves,  or  some  yellow 
and  white  flowers  in  a  dark  vase.  A  sunshade  of  brilliant 
colours  lying  open  on  the  grass,  half  in  shadow,  half  in  light, 
provides  an  excellent  model. 

A  coat,  a  cloak,  and  a  hat,  or  three  hats,  all  of  a  similar 
colour,  placed  on  chairs  several  paces  apart,  present  a  more 
fascinating  and  more  difficult  study  of  light  and  shade. 

The  reason  why  the  separation  of  the  articles  makes 
the  study  more  interesting  and  a  hundred  times  more  diffi- 
cult is  that  there  is  space  between  each  object.     And  this 

187 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

introduces  a  new  problem  which  requires  very  careful 
consideration. 

If  you  had  three  red  apples  of  a  bright  and  more  or  less 
uniform  colour  and  shape  and  placed  them  one  on  the  near 
end  of  a  form,  one  in  the  centre,  and  one  at  the  far  end,  and 
you  took  up  your  pencil  and  drew  the  light  and  shade  of  the 
three  apples,  would  you  draw  each  apple  with  the  same 
degree  of  light  and  shade  ? 

If  you  put  the  apples  on  the  ground  in  the  playground,  or 
garden  path,  or  open  field,  five,  seven,  and  twenty  paces 
away,  and  tried  to  draw  or  to  paint  them  (the  question  of 
light  and  shade  applies  with  equal  force  to  drawing  and 
painting),  would  you  draw  them  exactly  the  same  ? 

Would  you  not  give  the  near  apple  more  distinct  light  and 
shade,  more  accent,  more  strength  than  the  apple  farthest 
away  ?  Of  course  you  would  !  Even  if  you  drew  without 
thought  you  would  instinctively  draw  something  a  good  dis- 
tance away  in  a  broader  and  simpler  manner. 

For  the  sake  of  argument  let  us  presume  that  we  are 
painting  a  picture  representing  three  ladies  in  black  velvet. 
One  in  the  foreground,  another  in  the  middle  distance,  and  a 
third  in  the  far  distance.  If  we  painted  the  black  velvet 
dress  in  the  far  distance  as  richly,  as  strongly,  as  definitely 
as  the  black  velvet  dress  in  the  foreground,  we  should  paint 
an  untruth. 

Things  in  the  extreme  distance  must  not  be  as  strongly 
depicted  as  those  in  the  foreground  or  middle  distance,  as  I 
demonstrated  when  stating  the  first  rule  of  perspective. 

If  we  draw  or  paint  a  picture  of  a  street  with  its  diminishing 
houses,  railings,  lights,  pavements,  drawn  correctly  in  per- 
spective, but  ignore  the  air  that  intervenes  and  blots  details 
from  view,  then  we  shall  draw  something  that  is  not  true 
to  Nature. 

The  policeman  on  his  beat  at  the  end  of  the  street  is  merely 
a  dark  uniformed  figure  ;  as  he  approaches  we  note  that  he 
wears  a  high  helmet ;  nearer  still,  we  see  his  silver  badges 
and  buttons  and  shiny  boots  ;  as  he  passes  under  our  window 
188 


Light  and  Shade 


we  distinguish  the  tint  of  his  complexion  and  the  shape  of 
his  features. 

But  it  would  be  untrue  to  Nature  if  we  painted  or  drew 
details  in  his  face  when  he  first  appears.  His  face  is  a  blur 
— because  of  the  space  that  intervenes. 

Things  in  the  distance  cannot  be  as  strongly  drawn  as 
those  in  the  middle  distance.  For  between  the  artist  and 
the  distant  object  floats  a  veil  of  atmosphere. 

Some  young  artists  will  argue  that  they  have  seen  pictures 
drawn  with  firm  lines  and  details  even  to  the  very  horizon. 
This  is  perfectly  true.  But  we  must  bear  in  mind  that  we 
are  discussing  the  subject  from  the  point  of  view  of  pure 
light  and  shade.  It  is  quite  correct  to  say  that  details  can 
be  drawn  with  firm  outlines  and  the  effect  of  space  more  or 
less  ignored.  That  represents  a  certain  style  of  drawing  or 
painting,  a  conventional  kind  of  art.  But,  if  we  are  honestly 
trying  to  draw  light  and  shade,  if  we  are  drawing  varied  tones, 
painting  not  merely  flat  washes  of  colour,  but  gradated  tints 
to  represent  the  light  and  shade  of  colour,  then  we  cannot 
ignore  the  truth.  And  it  is  by  these  observations,  and  the 
recording  of  these  observations,  that  our  work  becomes 
artistic  or  otherwise. 

Such  facts,  like  all  simple  laws  of  Nature,  we  cannot  avoid 
even  if  we  would.  The  newspaper  with  its  photographs  of 
ordinary  events  confirms  them  daily.  Look,  for  instance,  at 
a  photograph  representing  crowds  gathered  together  in  the 
open.  In  the  foreground  are  large  strong  masses  of  light 
and  shade,  broken  up  into  details — clothes,  hands,  faces,  and 
features  ;  in  the  background  are  misty  effects,  either  of  trees 
or  other  details  of  a  landscape  ;  in  the  middle  distance  are 
groups  of  people,  some  sitting  and  some  walking,  their 
clothes  of  dark  or  uniform  tint,  their  faces  misty  blurs,  their 
features  indistinguishable. 

The  clearer  is  the  atmosphere,  the  more  distinct  is  the  dis- 
tance. The  more  brilliant  is  the  sun,  the  richer  and  deeper 
are  the  shadows.  The  rich  shadows  of  a  tropical  scene  will 
be  richer  in  the  foreground  than  in  the  distance.     It  is  purely 

1^9 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

a  matter  of  degree.  From  simple  objects  grouped  on  a 
table  to  complicated  scenes  in  a  landscape,  all  will  present 
their  own  peculiar  and  fascinating  problems  of  light  and 
shade. 

No  doubt  you  will  wish  to  try  other  methods  of  drawing 
light  and  shade  than  drawing  on  tinted  paper  with  chalks 
of  black  and  white. 

There  is  the  much  vaunted  method  of  rubbing  on  powdered 
chalk  with  a  stump  of  twisted  paper  or  kid  in  varying  tints 
upon  a  white  paper.  With  this  method  we  can  obtain  very 
subtle  gradations  by  erasing  with  rubber  or  bread  and  by 
stippling  in  with  the  stump.  Provided  that  we  attack  the 
study  with  vigour,  sketching  it  in  the  first  place  with  char- 
coal, and  rubbing  on  the  chalk  speedily,  and  not  spending 
too  much  time  smoothing  the  surfaces,  it  may  help  us 
to  learn  a  good  deal  about  light  and  shade.  Nevertheless 
there  is  a  very  great  danger  of  expending  too  much  time 
over  the  surface  at  the  expense  of  the  structure.  It  is  quite 
possible  to  stipple  in  a  head  or  an  arm  with  such  beautiful 
shades  of  light  and  tint  that  the  essential  shape  of  the  nose, 
head,  and  arm  is  forgotten.  In  other  words,  the  drawing 
is  lost. 

Have  you  not  seen  old-fashioned  stipple-drawings  of 
bygone  days  so  lacking  in  definite  shape  that  the  gentle- 
men and  ladies  are  dropping  into  a  sugary,  boneless  state  ? 
And  that  constitutes  one  great  danger  of  drawing  with  the 
stump. 

There  is  another  method.  By  covering  a  sheet  of  Michelet 
or  other  grained  paper  with  charcoal  lines  lightly  rubbed  to 
a  fairly  even  tint,  wiping  out  the  lights  with  rubber  or  bread, 
and  drawing  the  shapes  with  charcoal,  one  can  achieve  a 
very  artistic  study  of  light  and  shade. 

Another  method  strongly  advocated  by  one  very  famous 
art  teacher  is  drawing  with  pen  and  ink  on  a  smooth  white 
surface.  It  is  certainly  a  very  direct  method.  Pen  and 
ink,  however,  is  not  for  beginners  a  very  good  method 
of  drawing  light  and  shade.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  an 
190 


Fio;.   107.    Stump-drawing  of  Old  Man's  Head 


190 


Light  and  Shade 


extremely  difficult  medium  because  it  requires  a  considerable 
amount  of  experience  to  alter  and  correct  a  false  bit  of  tone 


Fig.  108.  Light  and  Shade  drawn  with  Pen  and  Ink 

satisfactorily,  but,  above  all,  broad  smooth  masses  of  light 
and  shade,  unless  done  by  an  experienced  hand,  have  a  very 
mechanical  effect. 

Light  and  shade  can  be  studied  with  the  brush  by  mixing 
sepia  and  flake  white,  ivory  black  and  white,  or  charcoal 

191 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

grey  and  white.  This  method  is  more  akin  to  pen  and  ink, 
inasmuch  as  it  requires  a  practised  hand  to  apply  clear  fresh 
washes  of  colour. 

For  the  beginner  a  '  dry  '  method  is  certainly  the  wisest, 
and  he  will  gain  valuable  experience  by  constant  experiment 
with  it. 


Vd\ 


CHAPTER  XVI 

Correcting  our  Drawings 

How  many  times  do  we  cast  our  pencil  down  and 
exclaim,  "  Oh  for  a  little  help  !  "  Or  we  take  up 
our  drawing  and  despairingly  rend  it  in  half. 

If  we  have  landed  in  a  hopeless  morass  of  difficulties,  we 
had  far  better  tear  up  our  drawing  or  fling  it  aside — and 
begin  again.  To  begin  again,  however,  on  the  same  object, 
round  which  clings  the  flavour  of  defeat,  is  dishearten- 
ing.    Personally  I  prefer  to  start  on  quite  another  subject. 

On  the  other  hand,  if  you  are  pluckily  determined  to  dis- 
cover your  mistakes  you  should  put  your  pride  in  your 
pocket  and  seek  out  your  nearest  available  friend,  who, 
though  ignorant  of  drawing,  may  detect  the  something  that 
is  wrong.  He  or  she  will  probably  laugh  (how  easy  it  is  to 
laugh  at  the  mistakes  of  other  people  ! ) ;  but  try  to  find  the 
reason  for  that  laugh. 

"  Why  laugh  ?  " 

"  Oh,  I  don't  know  why,  but  it  is  so  screamingly  funny." 

"  Where  does  the  scream  come  in  ?  " 

"  I  don't  know." 

"  You  must  know.  Is  it  the  face,  or  the  eyes,  or  the  hand  ? 
I  am  sure  the  hand  is  quite  good." 

"  N-no,  but,  oh  !  " — another  explosion  of  merriment — 
"  oh,  dear  !  did  you  ever  see  such  a  leg  in  all  your  life  ?  " 

And  in  all  probability  you  have  taken  more  care  with  the 
drawing  of  that  leg  than  with  the  rest  of  the  drawing  put 
together. 

Now  that  your  attention  has  been  drawn  to  the  leg,  look  at 

it  carefully ;   something  may  strike  you  as  peculiar.    It  may — 

you  possibly  concede — look  a  trifle  '  out,'  but  where  is  it 

N  193 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

wrong  ?  You  may  pounce  on  the  doubtful  drawing,  but  how 
will  you  correct  it  ?     You  might  even  make  matters  worse. 

Hold  up  your  drawing  before  a  mirror.  The  picture  will 
be  reversed,  and  seeing  the  unfortunate  detail  from  an  entirely 
different  point  of  view  sometimes — if  not  always — flings  the 
mistake  in  your  face. 

Should  you  find  it  to  be  so  in  this  instance,  try  again. 
Put  down  your  drawing  and  erase  it  gently.  Never  use  the 
rubber  viciously  or  revengefully,  as  you  may  be  tempted  to 
do,  for  you  must  always  treat  the  surface  of  your  paper 
with  respect. 

Supposing,  however,  that  you  are  still  unconvinced  ;  that 
you  believe  your  drawing  to  be  right  and  your  critic  wrong. 
Try  another  test. 

Hold  up  your  drawing  to  a  strong  light — of  a  lamp,  or  at  a 
window — and  look  at  the  back  of  it,  when  your  drawing  will 
be  seen  reversed.     Can  you  now  perceive  anything  wrong  ? 

He-who-cannot-draw  sometimes  fancies  things  are  wrong 
— ^that  I  will  admit ;  and  he-who-cannot-draw  can  be  just  as 
obstinate  in  his  opinions  as  the  artist. 

Should  you  honestly  feel  that  your  drawing  is  a  correct 
interpretation,  stick  to  your  opinion.  But  try  to  keep  an 
open  mind,  and  never  despise  advice  because  it  is  humble. 

Some  of  the  greatest  people  have  sought  the  advice  of 
simple  folk.  Wasn't  it  Moliere  who  read  his  plays  to  his 
cook  ? 

Try  to  get  an  expert's  opinion.  '  An  expert '  does  not 
necessarily  mean  an  expert  artist — that  we  cannot  often  hope 
to  find — but  one  who  is  expert  in  the  particular  subject  that 
is  engaging  our  pencil. 

For  instance,  if  I  made  a  study  of  a  cow  or  sheep,  I  should 
preferably  take  that  drawing  to  a  butcher  or  a  farmer  for  a 
criticism.  The  criticism  might  be  shattering,  but  there  is 
this  to  be  said  for  it.  The  man  who  is  familiar  and  more  or 
less  an  expert  with  such  animals  will  instinctively  pounce  on 
glari  g  mistakes. 

A  doctor  has  a  sound  working  knowledge  of  the  human 
194 


Correcting  our  Drawings 

frame,  and  I  shall  never  forget  the  laugh  of  a  doctor  when 
his  eyes  lit  on  my  first  attempt  at  drawing  the  figure  with 
the  surface  muscles  exposed.  I  learned  a  lot  from  that  laugh, 
or  rather  from  the  remarks  with  which  he  tried  to  excuse 
his  merriment. 

A  builder  might  let  fall  a  few  helpful  remarks  concerning 
the  drawing  of  the  steeple  of  a  church.  "  Rather  a  steep 
steeple,"  said  one  when  looking  at  a  sketch  of  the  village 
street  made  by  a  young  friend  of  mine. 

And  the  carpenter  might  possibly  remark  that  there  was 
something  very  peculiar  with  regard  to  the  chair  on  which 
the  lady  (of  your  drawing)  is  sitting. 

When  drawing  a  vase  on  a  table,  the  glass  round  which  a 
model  has  clasped  his  fingers,  the  tankard  on  the  sideboard, 
the  porch  under  which  mine  host  is  welcoming  or  dismissing 
the  guest,  turn  the  paper  upside  down  and  regard  it  from  an 
*  upside  down  '  point  of  view.  This  is  a  most  useful  way  of 
correcting  things  with  two  sides  alike,  and  probably  you  will 
notice  that  the  vase  bulges  rather  lower  on  one  side  than 
the  other,  that  the  glass  veers  to  one  side  and  its  stem  is 
not  quite  straight,  that  the  handles  of  the  tankard  do  not 
balance,  that  the  posts  of  the  porch  are  leaning  acutely  in 
two  different  directions. 

Another  method  of  correction.  If  you  have  drawn  a  vase 
and  feel  that  it  balances  badly,  draw  a  line  down  its  centre 
and  measure  from  the  central  line  to  the  outside  edges,  then 
note  whether  the  measurements  agree. 

Bear  in  mind,  however,  that  these  are  corrective  devices. 
Never  begin  drawing  with  mechanical  aids  of  the  kind. 
Always  draw  freely.  Make  your  correction  afterward.  If 
you  are  not  very  severe  with  yourself  on  this  point,  you  will 
find  yourself  depending  on  these  measuring  systems.  And 
overmuch  measuring  maketh  an  artist  brainless. 

Another  excellent  corrective  is  to  hold  the  drawing  at 
arm's  length,  or,  better  still,  place  it  near  the  model  (on  a 
chair  or  on  the  floor),  then  resume  the  position  from  ^  /hich 
you  are  making  your  study. 

195 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

Glance  quickly  from  your  drawing  to  the  model.  The 
strong,  and  often  cruel,  contrast  of  drawing  versus  Nature 
'  does  the  trick,'  and  emphasizes  faults  of  light  and  shade, 
construction  (or  framework),  balance,  and  proportions. 

In  the  drawing  of  the  "  human  form  divine  "  there  are 
many  things  tp  deceive  the  eye  and  make  the  task  difficult. 
Clothes  are  the  greatest  offenders — skirts,  wide  trousers,  full 
sleeves,  thick  leggings,  large  bonnets,  baggy  tunics,  cloaks, 
robes,  hats,  wigs — anything,  in  short,  which  is  bulky  is  de- 
ceiving. 

How  often  do  we  see  the  lady's  feet  emerging  from  her 
pretty  floating  skirt  in  a  position  which  is  a  physical  im- 
possibility ! 

The  Tudor  and  the  Early  Victorian  costumes  are  great 
temptations  to  the  novice,  who  greedily  seizes  upon  the 
picturesque  ample  robes  and  skirts  to  hide  the  difficult 
drawing. 

They  may  save  a  little  trouble  in  the  small  matter  of 
drawing  arms  and  legs,  and  even  feet,  but  beware  lest  they 
plunge  you  into  worse  difficulties  ! 

A  young  artist  of  my  acquaintance  loathed  the  drawing  of 
hands.  She  used  the  most  ingenious  devices  to  hide  the 
hands  from  view.  Winds  blew,  aprons  flew,  cloaks  floated 
and  concealed,  but  if  the  hands  had  of  necessity  to  appear 
then  she  was  utterly  lost,  and  found  that  she  had  no  know- 
ledge wherewith  to  inform  her  drawings.  Dutch  men, 
women,  and  children — what  favourites  they  are  !  And  there 
again  do  we  find  the  lure  of  the  dress  in  the  wide  trousers  of 
Jan,  and  the  big  sabots  of  Jan's  pretty  sister.  The  wider 
the  trousers,  the  fuller  the  skirts,  the  less  shall  we  see  of  the 
difficult  legs,  says  the  young  artist.  But  no  matter  how 
thick  and  frilly  are  the  petticoats  and  how  wide  are  the 
trousers,  those  difficult  legs  are  not  to  be  ignored.  They 
must  be  traced  lightly  beneath  the  garments. 

We  cannot  disguise  the  fact  that  if  we  are  drawing  human 
beings,  two  legs,  two  arms,  and  a  head  and  body  of  reason- 
able proportions  are  essential  for  each. 
196 


Correcting  our  Drawings 

Should  you  have  an  uncomfortable  feeling  that  there  is 
something  not  quite  correct  in  your  drawing,  that  the  feet  do 
not  come  in  the  right  position,  that  the  hand  protrudes  from 
the  frilled  wristband  at  an  angle  not  quite  in  harmony  with 
the  elbow,  take  your  picture  to  the  window,  lay  it  against  a 
pane  of  glass,  and  trace  the  head,  hands,  fee^,  and  all  parts 
revealed  on  the  back  of  the  paper.  Then  return  with  your 
drawing  to  the  table  and  (still  with  the  back  of  it  uppermost) 
connect  your  tracings  by  sketching  in  the  rest  of  a  human 
body. 

Ere  you  have  finished  your  sketch  you  will  possibly  appre- 
ciate that  you  have  made  the  limbs  play  queer  tricks  ;  it  is 
highly  probable  that  you  will  have  made  the  farther  limbs 
longer  than  the  nearer  ones.  We  have  sometimes  noticed  in 
sketches  of  persons  sitting  with  legs  crossed  that  the  limbs 
are  inextricably  mixed  ! 

Should  the  paper  on  which  you  are  drawing  be  of  too  thick 
a  substance  for  this  test,  take  a  piece  of  tracing  paper,  or  a 
smooth  piece  of  ordinary  tissue  paper,  and  on  this  trace  your 
drawing.  Then  remove  the  original  drawing,  and,  laying  the 
tracing  paper  on  a  white  surface,  link  up  the  head,  feet,  and 
hands  as  suggested  above. 

In  all  these  methods  of  checking  ourselves,  it  is  the  fresh 
view  of  our  drawing  that  reveals  its  weaknesses. 

When  painting,  if  you  feel  that  your  colours  are  not  what 
they  should  be,  that  your  tones  are  dark,  or  too  uneven, 
that  your  highest  light  is  not  '  in  tune  '  with  your  middle 
light — take  a  piece  of  smoked  glass  and  look  through  this  at 
the  reflection  of  your  painting.  Gone  are  the  pretty  colours, 
the  subtle  tints.  Your  painting  will  be  merely  a  prosaic 
black  and  white  affair,  and  with  everything  reduced  to  black 
and  white,  to  high  tones  and  low  tones  (light  and  shade),  in 
all  probability  the  wrong  tone  will  shriek  at  you. 

But  if,  after  all  these  various  methods,  you  still  can  see 
nothing  wrong,  though  a  horrid  feeling  prevails  that  all 
cannot  be  right,  if  neither  advice  nor  the  devices  described 
give  a  clue — then,  lock  up  your  drawing,  put  it  away  for  a 

197 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

few  days,  or  a  few  months,  until  you  have  entirely  forgotten 
the  circumstances  in  which  it  was  drawn.  When  you  again 
examine  it  the  chances  are  that  you  will  see  at  once  what  is 
wrong. 

Either  you  will  say,  "  How  could  I  miss  seeing  that  mis- 
take ?  "  or  (and,  believe  me,  the  chances  of  this  are  very 
remote),  "  Why  !   there  is  nothing  wrong — after  all." 


198 


CHAPTER  XVII 

Materials 

A  LARGE  stock-in-trade  is  a  mistake.  If  you  provide 
yourself  with  a  lavish  quantity  of  materials,  you  are 
probably  handicapping,  not  helping,  your  studies. 

Far  better  use  a  few  tools,  a  few  materials,  than  fly  from 
one  paper  to  another  paper,  from  one  pigment  to  another 
pigment,  from  chalk  to  charcoal,  and  charcoal  to  pastel. 

To  begin  with,  buying  many  expensive  materials  has  the 
great  disadvantage  that  it  is  likely  to  check  your  most 
valuable  instinct  for  experiment. 

If  you  stop  to  consider  whether  you  are  wasting  good 
material,  and  the  question  arises,  "  Have  you  anything  '  to 
show  for  '  the  expensive  paper  and  paints  ?  "  the  probabilities 
are  that  you  will  decide  to  finish  a  poor  piece  of  work  instead 
of  flinging  it  aside  in  favour  of  a  fresh  start. 

A  few  materials  well  chosen,  a  few  tools  well  handled,  are 
worth  a  whole  shop-full  used  irresponsibly. 

Buy  a  paper  that  will  serve  several  purposes.  Cartridge 
paper  will  '  take  '  pencil,  chalk,  or  water-colour.  It  is  a 
useful  all-round  paper.  Therefore,  I  would  advise  a  cart- 
ridge-paper sketch-book.  Do  not  begin  at  the  wrong  end  of 
this,  or  on  the  wrong  side  of  your  paper.  Lay  the  tip  of 
your  finger  upon  the  surface ;  you  will  soon  detect  that  the 
right  side  has  a  smooth  and  satiny  surface.  Michelet  paper 
is  suitable  only  for  charcoal  and  crayon,  and  thick  hand-made 
water-colour  paper  is  rather  unnecessarily  expensive  for  the 
early  stages. 

If  your  mind  is  definitely  settled  on  brushwork  invest  in  a 
medium  Whatman  or  O.W.  paper,  in  sketch-book  or  block 
form.     The  block  should  not  be  smaller  than  5|  by  7  inches. 

199 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

Nothing  cramps  the  style  more  effectually  than  block  or  book 
of  a  minute  size. 

Buy  pencils  of  a  medium  quality — HB,  B,  or  BB.  BBB's 
are  useful  for  soft  and  sympathetic  studies,  for  rich  shadows 
and  textures. 

Rubber  of  soft  crumbly  substance  is  preferable  to  hard  or 
gummy  rubbers  ;  ink-eraser  should  never  be  used,  it  destroys 
the  surface  of  the  paper. 

A  sketch-book,  a  pencil,  a  piece  of  paper,  and  a  knife — 
these  are  all  that  are  required  for  a  start. 

If  you  wish  to  draw  on  a  larger  scale,  you  must  buy  paper 
by  the  sheet,  which  necessitates  a  drawing-board,  drawing- 
pins,  and  an  easel.  Easels  are  stocked  in  every  quality, 
size,  shape,  and  description,  and  listed  in  all  the  colourmen's 
catalogues. 

For  water-colour  painting  you  require  a  small  colour-box 
(japanned  boxes  are  lighter  and  more  useful  for  sketching 
purposes  than  wooden  boxes),  a  moderate  range  of  colours, 
and  a  couple  of  good  camel-hair  or  sable  brushes. 

Good  brushes  are  essential.  You  can  trim  your  pencil, 
your  chalk,  your  charcoal  to  suit  your  various  needs,  but 
you  must  abide  by  the  brush.  A  brush  that  spreads  and 
splits,  or  that  moults  its  hair  over  the  paper,  will  be  of  little 
use.  A  large  full  brush  and  a  small  brush  will  suffice  for  every 
purpose.  Or,  if  preferred,  one  full  brush  of  a  medium  size 
(number  five  or  six)  with  a  fine  point  will  do  the  work  of  two. 

When  choosing  a  brush  dip  it  in  a  pan  of  water  and  roll 
the  point  on  the  hand,  or  on  a  piece  of  paper,  to  make  certain 
that  it  has  a  good  point. 

The  old-fashioned  hard  cakes  of  paint  had  many  excellent 
qualities  ;  the  colours  were  lasting  and  good,  but  the  rub- 
bing process  was  certainly  tedious,  and  they  are  seldom  seen 
nowadays.  The  half -pans  of  moist  paint  have  taken  their 
place  ;  they  are  not  wasteful,  provided  they  are  used  with 
ordinary  care.  On  the  other  hand,  tubes  of  paint — bearing 
in  mind  that  we  invariably  squeeze  out  more  colour  than  is 
necessary — are,  most  decidedly,  extravagant. 
200 


Materials 

We  can  trust  any  reputable  colourman  to  fit  a  box  with 
paints,  and  we  strongly  advise  buying  the  best  paints  and 
leaving  those  of  a  cheaper  grade  alone.  It  is  by  far  the  best 
economy.  The  small  boxescontain  eight  to  fourteen  half-pans. 
Group  your  colours  together  carefully.  Nothing  hampers 
a  young  artist  more  effectually  than  sprinkling  paints  hap- 
hazardly in  a  paint-box.  When  cobalt  jostles  vermilion  and 
lemon  yellow  flanks  ivory  black  your  paint-box  is  unbusiness- 
like. Group  together  blues,  reds  and  yellows,  browns  and 
black. 

A  box  to  hold  twelve  pans  should  contain  the  following 
colours  : 

Chrome  yellow  Vermilion 

Yellow  ochre  Vandyke  brown 

Raw  sienna  Ivory  black 

Burnt  sienna  Prussian  blue 

Light  red  Ultramarine 

Crimson  alizarin  Cobalt 

For  a  box  of  fourteen  colours  the  following  is  a  good 
selection  : 


Lemon  yellow 
Chrome  No.  1 
Yellow  ochre 
Vermilion 
Crimson  alizarin 


Light  red 
Raw  sienna 
Burnt  sienna 
Sepia 
Ivory  black 


Cobalt 

French  blue  or  French  ultramarine 

Prussian  blue 

A  tube  of  Chinese  white 


For  a  beginner  a  small  range  is  better  than  a  large  number 
of  colours.  A  multiplicity  of  tints  is  apt  to  bewilder  the 
mind.  By  experimenting  with  a  few  paints  we  can  obtain 
a  surprisingly  wide  range  of  tints.  We  must  learn  too  the 
good  as  well  as  the  bad  qualities  ;  how  one  tint  will  permeate 
others,  how  the  liquid  brilliance  of  one  will  neutralize  the 
dull  opaque  quality  of  another. 

201 


Drawing  for  Beginners 

Now  and  again  indulge  yourself  in  a  new  paint. 

Moist  aureolin,  cyanine  blue,  orange  madder,  are  all  a  little 
dangerous — a  little  expensive  and  delicious  to  handle. 

Before  leaving  the  subject  of  water-colour  paints  I  might 
mention  the  water-colours  in  tubes  known  as  '  slow-drying.' 
These  are  recommended  for  hot  climates. 

One  stipulation  more. 

Whether  you  have  a  lavishly  stocked  box,  or  whether  you 
content  yourself  with  a  modest  range  of  colours,  you  must 
always  treat  your  box  respectfully. 

Keep  the  paints  clean  and  dry,  the  palette  clean. 

It  is  a  good  rule  to  start  a  fresh  painting  with  a  fresh 
mixing  of  colours. 

Before  putting  your  box  away  see  that  no  paints  are  sub- 
merged under  water.  Colours  soon  deteriorate,  and  it  is 
astonishing  how  quickly  mould  will  accumulate  on  certain 
tints.  A  tiny  piece  of  sponge  is  useful,  and  pieces  of  soft 
rag,  freed  from  fluff,  are  almost  a  necessity  for  cleaning 
purposes. 

Chalks  or  pastels  are  often  used  as  an  introduction  to 
colour-work,  and  an  excellent  beginning  they  are.  They  are 
not  so  messy  as  paints.  They  train  the  eye  quickly.  We 
must  abide  by  the  chalk  or  pastel ;  it  is  difficult  to  correct  or 
erase. 

Chalks  are  the  cheapest  of  all  colour  mediums,  and  a  box 
of  twelve  pastels  costs  a  very  small  sum. 

The  large  boxes  containing  a  range  of  beautiful  tints  are 
necessary  for  more  advanced  work. 

Pastels  require  pastel  paper,  but  this  is  not  expensive  and 
it  is  easily  procurable.  As  a  substitute  for  pastel  paper  use 
brown  paper,  the  ordinary  packing  paper  with  a  not  too 
smooth  or  shiny  surface.  This  will  serve  excellently  for 
chalk,  both  black  and  white. 

White  (unsized)  sugar-bags  are  useful  for  water-colour 
painting.  The  inside  of  a  thick  white  envelope  provides  a 
choice  paper  for  pencil  or  black  chalk. 

Michelet  paper,  or  imitation  Steinbach,  is  useful  for  char- 
202 


Materials 

coal  studies.  A  grained  paper  is  more  satisfactory  than  one 
with  a  smooth  surface,  for  the  latter  tends  to  exaggerate  the 
brown  instead  of  the  rich  black  shades  of  charcoal.  Vine 
charcoal  is  sold  in  small  cheap  boxes  and  the  Venetian  char- 
coal in  larger  quantities. 

Plain  wooden  easels  last  a  lifetime.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  hinged  easels — of  which  there  is  an  enormous  variety — 
made  to  pack  in  a  small  valise  or  to  carry  in  the  hand,  are 
equally  serviceable  for  indoor  and  out-of-door  study. 

If  an  easel  is  not  at  hand  a  chair  can  be  used  as  a  substitute. 

Sit  on  one  chair  and  place  another  chair  with  its  back 
toward  your  knees.  Put  your  feet  on  the  back  rail  of  the 
second  chair  and  the  drawing-board  will  then  rest  on  your 
knees  and  (at  an  angle)  against  the  back  of  the  chair.  The 
seat  of  the  second  chair  can  be  utilized  for  your  various  tools. 

For  charcoal  studies  a  bottle  of  fixative  and  a  sprayer  are 
almost  a  necessity.  Charcoal  rubs  with  the  slightest  impact. 
Scent-sprayers  can  be  used  in  place  of  the  ordinary  metal  or 
glass  sprayers  sold  for  the  purpose  by  the  artists'  colourman. 

Once  more  I  advise  the  young  student  to  dispense  with  all 
unnecessary  paraphernalia  and  buy  only  necessities. 

Ponder  well  what  the  Scottish  mechanic  said  when  his  eye 
fell  on  Turner's  painting  of  Modern  Italy  : 

"  Eh,  mon,  just  see  what  white  leed  and  common  paint 
can  dae  in  the  hand  o'  genius." 


CENTRAL 


203 


INDEX 


Animals,  drawing,  98-105 
Ankle-bones,  position  of,  55 
Atmospheric  effects,  107, 109, 156, 

188 

Baby,  proportions  of  a,  61 ,  79 
Birds,  drawing,  92-96 
Boats,  drawing,  157-158 
Bonheur,  Rosa,  101 
Brush-drawing,  17-18 
Brushes,  choice  of,  200 

Cartridge  paper,  14,  199 
Chalks,  coloured,  202 
Chalk-drawing,  14-17 
Charcoal-drawing,  18-19,  190 
Composition,  171-181 
Cottages,  sketching,  144-145 

Ears,    drawing    the,    73-75 ;    of 

animals,  99-104 
Easels,  choice  of,  200,  203 
Expression,  importance   of,  165- 

166 
Eyes,  human,  65-69  ;    of  birds, 

92-93 

Figures,  drawing,  37-43;  balance 

of,  39-40 
Foot,    drawing    the,    52-59  ;     of 

birds,  94 
Frog,  drawing  a,  97-98 
Furniture,  proportions  of,  84-86 

Gainsborough,  Thomas,  170 
Giotto,  20-21,  22 


Hands,  drawing,  44-51  ;    propor- 
tions of,  83 
Heads,  drawing,  60-62 
Horizon,  in  perspective,  120 

Indiarubber,  choice  of,  200 
Interiors  of  houses,  in  perspective, 
137 

Kemp-Welch,  Lucy,  101 

Landscape,    thumbnail    sketches 

of,  155  ;   painting,  156 
Light  and  shade,  studies  in,  182- 

192 

Madonna  della  Sedia,  180 
Man,  proportions  of,  80-82 
Measure,  how  to,  115-116 
Michelet  paper,  19,  190,  202 
Mouths,  71-73 
Munnings,  A.  J.,  101 

Necks  contrasted,  human,  62-63  ; 

birds',  95 
Noses,   human,  69-71  ;    animals', 

98-99,  104 

Outline  drawing,  182 

Paints,   water-colour,    choice   of, 

200-202 
Papers,  drawing,  14,  16,  17 
Parallel  lines,  the  use  of,  114-118 
Pen-and-ink  drawing,  190 
Pencil-drawing,  13-14 
Perspective,  114-140 

205 


Drawing  for  Beginners 


Plumb-line,  the  use  of,  114-118 
Powdered   chalk,   drawing    with, 

190 
Proportions  of  inanimate  objects, 

83-87 

Raphael,  181 
Rembrandt,  166,  170 
Reynolds,  Sir  Joshua,  164,  166 
Rubens,  Peter  Paul,  170 
Ruins,  sketching,  154-155 

Shade,  studies  in  light  and,  182- 

192 
Silhouette  portraits,  160-163 
Sketching  outfit,  142 
Sprayers,  203 


Steinbach  paper,  203 
Stump-drawing,  190 
Subject,  choice  of,  20-27  ;  contrast 
of,  24-27 

Thumbnail  sketches,  155 
Tinted  paper,  183 
Titian,  165 
Tracing  paper,  197 
Trees,  drawing,  152-154 

Van  Dyck,  Antony,  170 
Velasquez,  165 

Wash-drawing,  191-192 
Wings,  of  birds,  95-96 


•.T-'Pl''""'^  *  ? 


5T10N 


>» 


■ 


i 


■ 


