iiiiiliiliiiliiPigi^^f".^^^ 






3Q> 



y\:ii7."jn Ji ^\ ;i 




MLLH 



1;5UA 




IfWMMIKmPil^liie 



3 3333 02373 9242" 



'hi'^c^re, draco /n^ s^or CLki l^ re 



TOE miTKAt cKttDffir s Rooa. 

;i|jlTO^.H.^. 10019 „.,,.;« 



'^EFERENC. 



FIGURE DRAWING FOR 



CHILDREN 



PAPERS OF SPECIAL VALUE TO ALL INTERESTED IN THE 
DEVELOPMENT OF ART AMONG THE CHILDREN 



BY 
CAROLINE HUNT RIMMER 



ILLUSTRATJONS B.Y TffJ^ AUTHOR 

"> >>' > > ) ' ^ , 3 



BOSTON 

D. LOTHROP COMPANY 

1893 



^ O 1^ K 

tub; ,.ry 

11550 



TiLC; 



ic 



Copyright. 1S93, 

BY 

Caroline Hunt Rimmer. 



All rights reserved. 



etc c ( 



t t t 

c c *■ I t 







THIS WORK 

IS AFFECTIONATELY DEDICATED 

TO 

LOUISE HARDING WILLIAMS 

BY THE AUTHOR. 



J 3 i 
3 3 



J > 3 J 



> 33 3 
33 33 



3 3 3 J 'j 
•' ^ ) 3> 3 3 



3 3' >'3 '^3 :> 3 

333 J > J 3 3 

V 3 3 ' \ 3 3 

^ ^ 5 3 3, 



5)333 
I 333 




I 4 * * t 


t 1 


* ,» 


t I » 


1 1 


' « * 




•• 




• I " '• • . • 

• t ' • ■ . 

1 ^ « t I 

I * I 4 *- * 


• 

• 
> 




,t ' I ' ' ' 
. I » » • • 


• • 






CONTENTS 



Proportions of the Child-figure 

Action by means of Single Lines 

Age and Action in the Single-Line Figure 

The Solid Form ..... 

The Solid Form, Side and Back . 

Action in the Solid Figure . 

The Head — Front View 

The Head— Side View 

The Head — Back View, and Expression 

The Arm, Fore-arm and Hand 

The Thigh, Leg and Foot 

Foreshortening and Composition 



9 
15 
21 

27 
33 
39 
45 
51 
57 
63 
69 
75 



PROPORTIONS OF THE CHILD-FIGURE 



PROPORTIONS OF THE CHILD-FIGURE. 




HE following lessons, while intended for children, 
contain a plan of work of value to all who wish 
to understand and draw the child-figure. 

In the choice of materials, for ordinary draw- 
ing, the Faber pencil marked HB. and the one 
marked HH. are preferable — the first mentioned 
for fine paper and the last for coarse paper. 

There are some things about the choice of 
materials a pupil must decide for himself, and 
this he can do after a little experience. Some 
always prefer a soft, others a hard, pencil, but anything softer than HB. or 
harder than HH. would not be found serviceable in ordinary work. Some of 
the cheaper pencils are excellent for ordinary use. It is not wise to say just 
how one should hold or sharpen his pencil. A certain amount of method is 
desirable — but to say drawings must always be made on one kind of paper or 
with a pencil having just so much lead exposed would be about as sensible as to 
say one must always draw while facing to the west or east in order to have the 
work correct. Never let any notions take the place of common sense. A good 
workman will be likely to get good work out of his tools. 

The directions 2:iven here will be of small value unless tliev lead the student 
to look for what lies in and behind the various forms, and cultivate in him an 
appreciation of the beauties and meanings of these forms. These rules should 
also help in giving expression through these child-forms to any idea that can be 
conveyed by them. In short, rules must be kept only as tools. 



In beginning the study of particular forms such as are found in the human 
ligure, there is a guide wdiich will lead to tl^e best results, and that guide we 
have in Proportion. 

The first thing is to understand this word. Proportion. Take an example : 
if one should draw a picture of a horse with the head twdce as long, for the size 
of the body, as a horse's head ever is, that head would be called "• out of propor- 
tion," because it Avould be neither natural nor graceful ; it w^ould have to be 
drawn much smaller before it would be right — the nearer it was drawn to the 
natural size when compared with the whole the nearer it would approach " good 
proportion." If the person meant to continue drawing horses and to have his 
work correct he would need to avoid making this kind of mistake, and in order 
not to repeat it would have to study horses carefully wherever he saw them — 



10 PROPORTIONS OF THE CHILD-FIGURE. 

on the street, in the field or stable ; one part wonld have to be compared with 
another and all the details learned. If he made a study of race-horses, he would 
find that they have certain lines different from the dra} -horse for instance, and 
these variations would be called the different proportions. " In Proportion " 
may be said to mean having all the parts in tune — one with another. 

One of the first steps in learning how to draw auA' particular form is to 
observe it closely; this habit alone can teach one to know good proportions 
from bad. One should be so accustomed to seeing the natural form, and to 
selecting the best to study, that he wdll detect mistakes in his work when he 
comes to try to draw what he has been noticing. It is a very clever thing for 
a pupil to be able to detect his own • errors and correct them ; if he find the 
lovely cherub he started to draw suddenly changing into a clumsy being (juite 
too large and mature for a cherub he will know it and can bring the figure back 
iagain to cherubic proportions. Again, if the artist constantly works to correct 
bad proportion he will develop in himself a sense of that which is correct and 
finest in drawing, not only in one form but in man}'. 

In drawing; a child the first thing to know is how to li'o to work to make the 
figure we draw look like a child and not a grown-up person — and as the best 
way to learn is to go directly to the life, one must watch children closely and 
find if possible what it is that makes them seem young. It is not alone their 
height or size ,• there are other things — certain forms, certain relative sizes of 
the different parts, which always belong to a bab}" or young child and never to 
an adult; these are called the child-proportions, and must l)e learned. 

The following rules will probably be thought very easy, and the be<;inner 
may say, '' Oh ! any one can do this," and then hurry on to what he may 
consider difficult enough to command his attention. 

Let such an one remember that there are few people who can get upon any 
of the higher rounds of a ladder without taking the first few steps. 

The easiest lessons to be learned in any work are too often passed over, not 
because they are thoroughly known and understood, but because '' anv one can 
learn them ; " and by so thinking, and so passing simple things by. the important 
groundwork of many a difficult undertaking has been allowed to lie unused, 
and the result left to show the lack. Errors in earliest lessons come most often 
from thoughtlessness, so it is well to consider at the start that anything tliat is 
worth working upon is worth giving one's best thought to. The result in your 
work will be of your making, and not that of your materials. 

Never let any one have an opportunity to criticise your drawings for lack of 
employing a rule well known to yourself. As one goes on it will be found that 
very often the apparent simplicity of a work is the most difficult to acquire. 

^ To begin, draw a straight perpendicular line ( Fir/. 1). Let this represinit the 
height of the whole child-figure. Divide it into five equal parts {Fi(j. 2). At 



PROPORTIONS OF THE CHILD-FIGURE. 



11 



at a sligl 
eqi 



/ 



the iouri counting from the top, which we shall call the hip, start a line 

I and let it go down as far as the first line ; divide it into two 
s like the one beside it and we have the legs ( Firj. 3). 
^e will turn to the three sections above the hip, and after doing 
a little more we shall have in single lines the whole framework of 
the fio-ure of a babv or young child — cherub if vou like. 

From the second dot, counting from the top, draw a line at a 
slitrht ano;le which shall reach a little below the fourth dot ; divide 
this into two equal parts. With a similar line made on the other 
side we have both arms {Fig. 4). 

Now for the head draw" an oval inclosing the whole space from ^ ..j^^p 
the top of the line to the second dot. Be careful that the oval is 
not made smaller than the space will allow — it can safely be made ^ 
a little larger ( Fig. 5). 

k large head always dwarfs an adult figure, but it is a marked 
feature in the proportions of the child. Little room is left for the neck ; Fig. 2. 
it is because babies or young children have very short necks ; and at the begin- 
ning of the study it is quite as well not to consider the neck, as it would be 
safer to have no length given for it than have the neck made too 
long. The space it really occupies will be seen as w^e go on. 

Short lines mav now be added to the arms and the leo-s for 
hands and feet. The end of the hand should reach to about 
the middle of the thigh. We now have {Fig. 5) the completed 
plan of the child-figure, in correct proportions. 






The plans given in 
drawn any size the pupil 
hold the same in large 
is well to make several 
Before going on, 
well learned and Avell 
plan can be made cor- 
tion and without measuring, 
depends on these lengths — 
of the child-fio;ure — being 
Right proportions are the 
mentary work must be accpm- 
the realm of ideal creations. 



Ke<£cl. 



A 



rm-; 




S 



T^el. 



Fig. 5. 



these lessons may be 
desires ; the proportions y 
or small drawings. It 
of different sizes, 
this lesson should be 
practiced, so that the 
rectly without hesita- ^'^' ^' 
Success in the future Avork 
representing the proportions 
mastered and remembered, 
basis of correct figures. Eudi- 
plished before ouq can soar into 
No amount of o'ood rules com- 



mitted to memory, without use, will enable one to draw, 
embodied in good results by constant and careful exercise. 



Rules must be 



ACTION BY MEANS OF SINGLE LINES 



V 

i 



.( 



ACTION BY MEANS OF SINGLE LINES. 




T this lesson we shall study the single-line figure, ana 
see how it can be made to express action without the 
addition of other lines. 

As names have been given the different parts of the 
completed diagram, or single-line child-figure — head, 
body, arms, legs, hands, feet, etc. — the parts must now 
be called by their names when referred to. 

Draw first five perpendicular lines of the same 

length, divide each line into five equal parts, and then 

add heads, as in Fig. 6. Next draw the arms and the 

other leg and give the limb-lines hands and feet. 

Do not make the five figures alike, however. Vary the direction of all lines 

except the first or perpendicular line, and see how much you can make the 

single-line figures look like children in different attitudes, as in Fig. 7. 

Endeavor to give the five figures as great a variety of action as possible. 
Aim to get both good proportion and good action. Correct and expressive 
action depends largely on correct proportion. Do not expend your effort on 
funny figures only. Try to embody the serious emotions also. Action, life, 
movement, is first ; then work for strong and graceful and expressive action. 

Observe that with very little change in the lines very great change can often 
be made in the action — in the idea or feeling expressed. This indicates the 
value of every line and touch 
of the pencil, and the impor- 
tance of careful attention to 
every detail. 

In the examination and 
comparison of all work done 
lies the sure means of prog- 
ress. 

While working, if the re- 
sult is not what you think it 
should be, do not erase all 
and perhaps lose much that 
is good. Instead, consider 
with care and ascertain precisely what is Avrong, and correct that. Do not 
throw away time and labor. Never give up a first idea merely because you lack 
Patience ; persevere and master the difficulties. 



(I) Q Q (p (D 



Fig. 6. 



16 



ACTION BY MEANS OF SINGLE LINES. 



The work at the start — the single-line child-figure — is very simple, and 
there is danger that the pupil may become careless, and forget the guide, the 
imperative importance of right proportions, and make one leg long and the 
other short, or both legs longer than the body. In drawing trees and rocks it 
would do to have a change from the nature-study in the length of lines here and 
there, because in landscape there is no exact relation in size of rock to hill or 
flower to tree, but in the human figure there is a definite relation in size of arm to 
body, in foot to leg. The work will be incorrect and unsatisfying if the law of 
proportion is not remembered and observed, and all the work done with care. 




i-\. 






Fig. 7. 



It is well to have a slate or blackboard on the wall for practice work. As 
you draw, be your own critic, by walking off and taking a view of the lines from 
a distance, where the real relation of one part to another can better be judged. 
Go back and forth and correct by adding or erasing lines until you feel you ha\e 
reached the best you can do. 

After this good work of self-criticism, sit down and copy the final result for 
preservation. Proceed in this way with all the lessons, and you will have an 
interesting and permanent record of the progress you have made. A portfolio 
of such drawings will be very serviceable. 

I would speak again of the value of my seemingly simple directions. By 
standing at some distance from the blackboard one takes a comprehensive view 
of one's work ; whereas, sitting cramped over a bit of paper on the lap. one is 
apt to give undue attention to parts and details, and therefore not see the real 
proportions and relations as a whole. 

Study everything at which you look in a large, free way : cousider the whole "] 
as well as the detail, and the meanino; behind it all. Trv to look at what \on 
are doing as if it were the work of another. See frankly both the good and h M 
in it. Try to decide definitely what changes, if any, it needs, and make tlu 

1' 



ACTION BY MEANS OF SINGLE LINES. 



17 



^ard to practice work I would further say — in connection with these 
5ind luier exercises — set apart a time each day in which to work seriously at 
measuring (by the eye only) certain objects or parts of objects, and note in 
however simple a form the decision in a sketch on paper. This is advised to 



bring about the habit of correct 
work is a particularly valuable 
cautious and exact. 

As you discover failures in 
of exercise work with the pen 
correction of such imperfections^ 

Be acquainted with your errc 
kind of work wliich will unmista 
the room, for instance, and ask ;, 
sent the height of a certain chn' 
shorter the cricket than the pi 
perpendicular and that of anoth* 
of any object with its greatest ^ 
observation by actual measure •. 
and better to cultivate the eye 
which is lilvely to make your w 

Never be fussy about the 1: 
make a clean straio;ht or curv 
have in mind that which you y 
is likely to take care of itself, 
nothing but lines, whereas, for 
he Avill be sure to have some 
one sets his mind earnestly ui 
sooner or later. 



:j; heights and widths. Any such 
' drawing, for here one must be 

s, from time to time select a kind 
all be directed especially to the 



Li'vi X . 



■. 'til .^C. 

than . ' 

.>stool ^ 
1 anting: '^ 



;i.:i;arize yourself with attacking the 

iini'^'^ 3 upon such things. Look about 

"ow much longer line would repre- 

i represent its width ? How much 

iS the line of the back of one chair 

etc. Compare the greatest height 

^ i '' nay after a time proyp^+jtiife Ki\ia oi 

•li. JUL .»o this very sel^ciom, for it is wiser 

sensi,' "feeling" in art, than do anythino- 

v mechaaic^l. 

« in themselves ; any one I'jbght to be able to 
line af ■ a while. But do you be sure and 
s; if the meaning- is in it the line 
nks only of lines will be apt to get 
striving first of all to express action, 
gnificance in his work. Whatever 
pencil will be verj' sure to produce 



i[ 




"N. 





-< \ 



AGE AND ACTION IN THE SINGLE-LINE FIGURE 



AGE AND ACTION IN THE SINGLE-LINE FIGURE. 




OMETIMES the best way to learn the vakie or meaning, the good 
points or defects, of what we see or do is to compare it with 
something else. For instance, let us draw side by 
side the single-line child-figui-e and the figure of a 
man in single lines, and note the differences. 

Draw two perpendicular lines of the same leno-th. 
Divide one as in the preceding lessons, and complete 
with head and limbs (Fig. 8). To the other, which is 
to become the adult figure, add the head, which should 
be in length about one seventh of the whole leno-th 



of the line ; then place a dot about 
head below it, which will mark the 

Next divide with dots the bal- 
three equal parts {Flfj. 9). Then 
first dot, at the lower end of the 
ly to the second, and to that add 
half-way between the second and 
parts of the arm. Draw the other 
line from the second dot and carry 
after dividing this into two parts we 
hands. We now have the complete 

Compare carefully the com- 



® 




Fig. 8. 



J 

Fig. 9. 



/T\ 



half the length of the 
space for the neck, 
ance of the line into 
start a line from the 
neck, and carry it near- 
another which shall reach to about 
third dots. Those lines form both 
arm in the same way. Now start a 
it down to the end of the first hue ; 
have the legs. Add the feet and the 
single-line adult figure [Fig. 10). 
pleted single-line child and adult 
same lenoth of 



figures constructed on the 

starting-line {Fig. 11.). Note the .relatively greater 
length of leg, the far longer neck (almost none in the 
child), and the smaller head, in the adult figure. 

In real life the height of the child and adult figures 
is not the same, however, though the proportions of 
each are as shown in the single-line figures in Fig. 11. 
If, therefore, we draw the two single-line figures with 
the relative heights of real life, though the proportions 
of each remain the same, we get as a result Fig. 12.. 

We will now ] roceed with the study of action by 
means of single 1 nes. In the last lesson [Fig. 7) we 
were limited to ihe movements of the arms and one 
We will now vary the action of both legs, and of the head, 
the lines to further approach the real human figure. 



Fiff. 11. 

We will also 



90 



AGE AND ACTION IN THE SINGLE LINE FIGURE. 



The single figures and groups in Flrj. 13. indicate the wide range of pose, 

apfion and expression now possible. 

Copy these carefully on a larger scale. Do not stop there, how- 
(V) ever ; do not merely copy these, but go on, and draw original 

^ fio-ures and groups that shall express ideas and tell stories — this 

work is by far the more important. Let the examples inFii/. IS. 
only serve to give suggestions of what to do and how to do it. 
The intention always is to develop the pupil's own faculty for 

seeing and doing. ' 

It will be good practice to make two drawings ot each figure. 

As it is 
usually 
easier to 
draw the 
figure fa- 




Fif/. 12. 




cing either to the right 
or the left, make a sec- 
ond drawing facing in 
the opposite direction. 
This will be good dis- 
cipline, and will, as it 
were, by rule prove 
the example. 

Some simple rules 

of proportion are often 

convenient, and may 

be given here. In the 

fio-ure of a child there 

must be about four and 

a half times the length 

of the head in the 

height of the whole 

figure, that is from the 

top of the head to the 

bottom of the feet. A 

baby is about three and 

a half times the height 

of his head, which you 

see gives a still larger 

head for the baby than 

for the child in proportion to his whole height {Fig. 14) In the series of figures 

in Fig. 15 this change of proportion with change of age is more clearly shown 



AGE AND ACTION IN THE SINGLE-LINE FIGURE. 



23 




Fig. 14 




by the same-sized head placed on figures of different heights and proportions. 
Of these five, the first httle figure represents the baby with large head, long 
body and short limbs; the second is the young child with head 
still large for its height, the body yet long, but with limbs grown 
a little ; the third stands for the youth with longer neck, arms 
and legs ; the fourth represents the young man fast approaching 
man's proportions ; the fifth represents the full-grown man. 

In drawing the figures in action be careful in your first work 
that you have the lines bend the right way at the joints. There 
are two kinds of joints in the human figure. The joint at the 
s'houlder and that at the hip is called a cup-and-ball joint, or 
socket, because the arm and thigh can be moved not only backwards and for- 
wards, but sideways in all directions. The joint at the elbow and at the knee is 
called the hinge-joint, 
because it can be bent 
only back and forth as 
a hinge is bent. 

An excellent way to 
get suggestions of ac- 
tion for figures is to 

run the pencil or chalk til lit \\\ \\\ WW 

in a line curving or 
bending sharply in one 
or more ways the length 
you wish the whole fig- 
ure to be, and then re- 
gard it as the main line of action, and by dividing it and adding the head 
and limbs make the complete figure in single lines. Do this repeatedly and 

3^ou will come to see life and 
movement in anj^ and every line. 
If you see a person in a posi- 
tion which vou would like to 
imitate in single lines on A^our 
paper, and there is not time for 
the whole drawing before the 
position will be changed, think 
one line will best express the atti- 
and quickly put . it on paper, and 
then from memory add the different parts 
[Fig. 16). It will be well to accustom 
irself to this sort of pictorial short-hand. ♦ 

Now is the time to gain facility in using the pencil, and to acquire freedom 



Fi;/. 15. 




Fig. 16. 



/ 



24 



AGE AND ACTION IN THE SINGLE-LINE FIGURE. 



in line. While having practice with these simpler forms it is not wise to 
venture beyond what you know, but do boldly what you can with the knowl- 
edge already gained. Put all the character possible into the lines. 

In trying to express on paper any action you have seen, be sure you do not 
give it less force than it had. It is better to have your work too strong than 
to have it weak and meaningless. 




'1 



THE SOLID FORM 



/ 



X 



THE SOLID FORM. 





|E shall next study and draw tho solid form 
of the child-fitrure, that is, instead of 
employing only the single straight or 
curved lines, we shall give in their places 
the rounded sections which belong to 
each part. 

In leaving the simplei 
form — sini'le lines — for 
solid sections, bear in mind 
that the parts of the figure are all to be represented by rounded 
sections, and not by anything which a])proaches the square : 
that the head and body lead as most distinct, both in form and 
])roportion ; that the limbs are 
nate, though having their im- 
be carefully considered in a 
At first it will he best for 
these new shapes over a plan 
lengths of the different di vi- 
and no liberty be taken with 
To proceed with a moi-e 
forms, we shall hereafter make 
egg. which may be described 
end narrowei" than the 
egg-shaped oval, and 
as the general form of 
Of this, more will be 
All the parts rep- 
when seen in front 
Fifj. 18. The forms 




Fif^. 18. 



ordi- ^ 

portant divisions, which will 
later lesstm. 

the student to carefully draw 
in single lines, so that the 
sions may be kept in mind, 
the proportions. 
j)articular rendering of the 
the head in the shape of an 
as a long ball with the lower 
upper. This is called an 
should always be remembered 
the human head — see Fig. 17.. 
said in another lesson, 
resented in the solid sections, 
view, should be drawn as in 
here given closely approach 



the completed figure, and must be thoroughly understood and mastered, 
so that they can be drawn readily without referring to the example. 
Study each section carefidly, comparing one part with another. 

Observe that the body piece is about twice as long as it is wide, and 
fig. 19. ^-^^^ -^g greatest width is at or a little below the center. 

We now come to the limbs. The u])per, the whole of which is commonly 
called the arm, is divided into three parts: that from shoulder to elbow is 



28 



THE SOLID FORM, 




correctly called the arm — that from elbow to wrist the fore-arm, and from wrist 

to finger-tips the hand. The lower extremity, the whole of which is usually 

called the leg, is also divided into three parts : that from hi}) to knee is 

the thigh, from knee to ankle the leg, and from ankle to toe-tips the foot. 

Pay particular 'attention to the way in which the parts are united. 

Notice, for instance, that the lower end of the arm, in front view, sets 

down upon the fore-arm as in F'uj. 19, and that the sections are 

never united as in FUj. 20. Also notice that in front view the 

thigh at the knee passes down over the leg, !is in F'kj. 21. In 

FUj. 22, m.ark the way in which the leg unites with the foot. 

The top of the foot sets up a little way into the lower end of 

the leg. Study these sections carefully and then again turn to 

the body. 

'^' ■ When the body piece is seen in side and back views its 

outline is lost in places where the arms and thighs join it, but in the 

front view the body piece is more clearly defined. Fxg.2\. 

The only addition to be made to the solid sections, as shown in FUj. 18, is that 
which unites the arm with the body at the front and which is called the chest 
or pectoral section, taking its name from the large pectoral muscle which nearly 
fills the space between the arms of the front. This muscle hides some- 
what the outline of the body section ; one half of it being on either side 
the central line of 
the body and pass- 
ing from a broad 
mass on the upper 
ribs into a narrow 
band which is fas- 
tened to the arm, 
Fig.^. each hidf having 
the form of a triangle. In 
the child, the pectoral or 
chest section is seen as in 
Fig. 23. 

In birds, the pectoral 
muscle is very powerful, be- 
ing attached to the breast- 
bone and then to the wino-. 
which corresponds to our 
arm, and it is mainly by its 
use that they fly. 

A marked characteristic of the child-figure, and one that must be secured 
in every correct picturing of children, is the narrowness of the body piece 





Fig. 23. 



THE SOLID FORM. 



29 




Fi<i. 2a. a. 



junder the arms and at the lower end which is called the pubic section {Figs. 
23 and 23 a). 

Do not forget that in children the arms are placed high, leaving little room 

for the neck, and that the top of the arm makes the 
shoulder. The body piece being n.-rrow near the head we 
find that when the arms are added the shoulders are near 
together. It may be set down as a rule that the shoulders 
of a child are high and narrow. 

It is a little carious that most people, when they begin 
to draw children, fall into certain errors in proportion 
which surely result, however well all else may be drawn, 
in forms most unchild-like. By way of precaution at the 
outset, it will be well to point out some of these mistakes 
so often made. 

First, the shoulders are usually drawn too wide. Now, it takes years for the 
shoulders to grow broad, and that is a marked feature of the adult figure. Then 
the legs are likely to be too long. This again is a serious defect, as it reduces 
the proportionate length of the body, which in the child is the longest single 
division. Another fault comes from making a long neck, and the head heavy 
at the lower end. Avoid such errors, and carry in mind the rule that of the 
whole height three fifths must be above the hips and two fifths below the hips. 
Compare Figs. 24 and 24 a and note how in the one, with a very few lines which 
keep to the right proportions, the child form may be obtained, and how in the 
other, by not observing correct proportion, the child-like character is wholly 
lost. 

Sometimes a drawing that in certain parts is very contradictory to the rules 
of good proportion, will be so correct in others, and so admirable in details, that 
the whole passes for good and clever w^ork. This is possible only when the 
worth of the parts that ate wrong is less than the value 
of those that are right. As an example. Fig. 24 could 
not indicate anything but the baby form, however care- 
lessly the details might be drawn, but on the contrary 
the proportions in Fig. 24 a would never suggest a 
child even if the minor parts were most correctly given, 
since so much that is essential to the child-figure has 
been denied it. 

The largest sections are always most easily distin- 
guished, and the, just consideration of them (which 
would seem easy) lies at the foundation of good draw- 
ing, yet they are too often slighted, and attention given to minor parts and de- 
tails, at the sacrifice of time and labor in the first place, and of a good result in 
the end. 





Fig. 24. 



Fig. 24 a. 



30 



THE SOLID FORM. 



After one lias schooled himself to first define the princijDal divisions, he wi. 
find it easy to manage the smaller and the details of each. Bear in mind tha 
all the little parts are of secondary importance, and only to be added to giv( 
completeness and interest to the main sections. They are only valuable when sc 
used — just as jewels are of less value than the wearer. Be determined when 
drawing; from life never to see more details than are needed to o-ive refinement 
to your work. 





{ 



.1 



THE SOLID FORM, SIDE AND BACK 



) \ 



THE SOLID FORM, SIDE AND BACK. 




N the side view of a child we observe that the body has two strongly 
contrasted lines — the front and back lines of the body section. 

The line of the back is nearly straight, curving in slightly per- 
haps, and leaning slightly forward, while the line of the front of 
the body curves boldly outward, more in the lower part than in the 
upper, so that the thickest part of the body is toward the lower end. 
This difference is due largely to the rigid bony structure at the 



back and the 
at the front, 
of the underly- 
as the spinal column, which 
curves but little if any, and 
pressure from within. The 
on the contrarv, curves 
ward, especially at the lower 
all the viscera, or that which 




Fig. 25. 



within the outline, cannot 

of growth be held in place by the bony structure, as 
it is in the adult figure, and consequently the mus- 



elastic muscular structure 
In a young child that part 
ing frame or skeleton known 
can be felt along the back, 
it yields hardly at all to 
front of the body section, 
strongly out- 
end, because 
is contained 
at this stayre 




cular abdominal wall, 
pressed forward by 
As the figure ma- 
skeleton develops with 
curves come 
hips broaden, 
grow larger 
aiford a bet- 
various inter- 
figurie also becomes more 
)tice a young child, and you 
n advance of his toes. This 
md verv straio;ht, or trv to 
ikely stumble and fall often, 
out brave ideas of speed 
lildhood means dependence 



yielding easily, is 
what lies behind, 
tures, the frame or 
m a r k e d changes; 



m 



the 



spine. 



the 



Ficj. -n. 




Fkj. 26. 



Fi(i. 28. 



and all the parts 

and stronger, and so 

ter support to the 

nal organs ; the 

erect. 

will see that he walks with his 

he does to defend himself. Should 

lean back, in walking, he would 

His body is not made so as to 

and carriage. 

and not independence, and all 



ngs of child-life must have in them this characteristic element. 
\g. 25 gives \^(^ «irlp view of the body section when taken alone. 



34 



THE SOLID FORM. SIDE AND BACK. 






Fiy. 30. 



/-!>. 31. 



In Fig. 26 is shown the outer side view of the thigh, leg cond foot. 
The toj) of the thigh goes up to a point called the hip, and the upper back 
part of the thigh is a full curve, forming what is called 
the gluteal section. All the parts are larger at the upper 

than at the lower end. Notice that 
the front of the thigh, as it ends in 
the knee, extends down lower than 
the back of the thiLrh 
where it joins the calf 

of the leg. Observe that the lower end of the 

leg sets down into the foot in this view. Note 

carefully the proportion the foot bears to the 

whole limb. 

Side views of the arm will be found in F'uj. 27 and Fig. 28. 

In Fig. 29 we have the side view of the entire child-figure. 

The outline of the body section, where hidden by the other 

parts, is indicated in this drawing by dotted lines, to show the 

proper attachment of the limbs. 

Give particular attention to tlie form of the body at the 

lower end ; do not carry the abdominal line down without 

paying respect to the different plane at the 

lower end which always marks the pubic section 

'^' ' plainly to be seen in side and front view. The 

front outline of the young child's body is called an unbroken curve 

— this refers particularly to the abdominal line — that part between 

the chest and pubic section. 

When the baby is seated, this abdominal part is a soft section 
which pushes up against the chest section or down 
upon the thighs, making it seem difficult for the 
little fellow to get at his toes. When 
standino:. this abdominal section has a 
tightened or firm outline, and projects 
well forward. 

The drawing of the back of the child-figure is 
usually found more difficult bv beginners than the 
front or side — perhaps because the outline of the body section 
is lost by its union with the head and limbs. It may be easier 
therefore if. at first, the entire outline of the body be left, as if 
seen through the arms and thighs, until these parts are rigli iy 
placed; then the lapping sections of the body outline wli <1» 
should not show may be erased. 

In the first place, make the head an egg-shaped oval as before {Fig. 30), then 





Fiy 32. 



Fifj. 33. 



THE SOLID FORM, SIDE AND BACK. 



35 



draw a line to mark the base of the head at the back, as in Fig. 31. To this add 
the body section, of the form and in the position shown in Fifj. 32. Attach the 
arras at the npper part of the body as in 
Fig. 33. Fig. 34 shows the back of the 

thiti-h, leo; and foot. Notice 

particidarly (Fig. 35 ) that 

the top of the thigh, forming 

the hip and the gluteal section, 

sets well up on the lower end 

of the body piece. In all 

views the hip is higher than 

the lower end of the body. 

One more important sec- 
tion is yet to be added, and 

that is the scapular section, 

which takes its name from the 

scapular bone, or, as it is com- 

Fig. 34. ^ , n V i' 111 

monly called, the shoulder- 
blade (Fig. 36). This joins the arm to 
the back as the pectoral or chest section 
fastens it to the front of the body. Of 

these two important parts of the upper end of the body, the front is more rounded 
or curved. The marking of the scapular section seen in the uncovered back of 

a young child is unsurpassed for deli- 





Fi(j. 35. 




cacy. This bone, which in all figures 
is held in its place by muscles, and 
moves about on' the rib section, here, 
though so tiny, is beautifully distinct 
in its action as it moves with the 
changes of position of the arm. The 
flesh upon the baby's back is never 
very heavy, so an opportunity is al- 
lowed for the study of the changes in 
outline which its movements make. 
The cavity under the arm is called 
axilla. In most positions of the arm 
it is well marked. Tlie neck may be 
indicated as in Fig. 36, which gives the 
completed view of the child-figure. 
"When working independently of 
lessons, and it is well to take a variety of subjects, do not touch pencil to 
without first having carefully studied the object which you are to repre- 



Fig. 36. 



36 



THE SOLID FORM, SIDE AND BACK. 



sent, so that every drawing you make will be a clear expression of your idea 
regarding the form of its subject. 

In drawintj; the human fia;ure it will not answer merelv to imao-ine or o-uess 
at the form and position of the parts ; you must really know these facts and be 
familiar with all the details. 

In whatever you attempt, never let the difficulties appear to you greater 
than the beauties. 

Never make a drawing merely for the purpose of showing you can accom- 
plish a difficult piece of work. 

Seek to discern and preserve some delicacy, or strength, or beauty, or mean- 
ing, that will call for all your skill, and be worthy its best effort. 




' < 



ACTION IN THE SOLID FIGURE 



ACTION IN THE SOLID FIGURE. 




OW that the single lines have given place to solid 
sections, the next step is to represent the figure in 
action by means of these new forms. 

Endeavor to work as freely as when using the 
simpler means. Bear in mind that it is always an 
advantage gained when you can work with confidence 
in yourself. 

Before starting upon this new work I may say 
that when a lesson is learned, that is, as soon as the 
advance work of any lesson is well understood and 
has been well practiced, then make original 
use of it ; make it go as far as it can toward 
expressing some idea of your own. Add to 
it, too, any or all the information gained 
from the preceding lessons. Strive to have 
at your command all that has been taught 
before. Draw and draw again anv form or 
position that may be possible 
by following the plan already 
given. Be slow to add to 
this any half -learned ways of 
doing things from 
other sources, lest 
your exercises grow 
to be beyond your 
criticism, and you lose the 

whole practice by confusing that which you should know well 
with uncertain additions. 

A good way to begin, in representing the solid form in action 
IS first to draw a single-line figure in the desired position, and 
then draw the solid section on or outside that foundation. Firjs. 
37 and 37 a will make this clear. Figs. 38 and 38 a, 39 and 
39 a further illustrate this method. 

In the young child, the bony framework or skeleton bears a 
less important part as support for muscles, and a smaller share in shapino- the 
outline, than at any other period of growth, because it is in a state of formation 
The parts that later are to be strong, and come upon the surface in well-defined 





Fig. 37. 



Fig. 37 a. 



Fig. 38. 



40 



ACTION IN THE SOLID FIGURE. 




proiections are undeveloped in the baby and concealed by the soft outer covering. 

^Zis especially true of the joints. The lack of growth n. ^^^J^ 

muscles is peculiar to the young child only. This is the one 
great reason why the baby form is so pliable, so easily bent m 

any position. . . i ,• ^ 

In Figs. 39 a and 39 b, notice that the abdominal or front 
line rolls out or doubles upon itself, and that the 
line of the back also is rounded. This is caused by 
the internal organs pressing against the side walls 
that hold them when the height of the cavity is 

shortened b y 
bending for- 
ward. 

If any diffi- 
culty should be 
met when try- 
Fiy. 38 fl. ing to draw the 

figure seated, 
it will be well to start with the 
side view. This is easiest for a 
beginner, because the proportions 
can easily be kept in sight, and 
no foreshortening be needed as . . t i -^^f 

in a front view. Foreshortening is the apparent shortemng o a hue or object 
seen obliquely, or endwise. See Figs. 40 and 40 a. 

When a figure is seated it loses a portion of the height it has 
when standing, very 
much as a penknife 
with the bhule half- 
closed has less length 
than when the blade is 
wide open. 

To make a figure sit 

down, you ma}^ keep the 

body line upright, but 

from the hip to the 

knee the lines must be 

nearly horizontal. From the knee to 

the foot the lines may ha vertical 

again, if you like, or bent backward or 

forward a little ; one knee may be drawn a trifle above tl 




Fig. .iO. 




Fig. 39 b. 




Fig 40. 



line be leaned forward, as if the child were studying sometl 



Fig 40 a. 

; the body 
a'oiit of him. 



ACTION IN THE SOLID FIGURE. 



41 




or tipped back a little as when leaning against the back of the chair. The thing 

that makes the person look seated is the horizontal direction of the thighs, with 

the upright body. 

It is something worth while to be 
able to seat the figure ; but, as comfort 
and ease are desirable, try also and 
make your children look as if they en- 
joyed the position. When a child re- 
clines upon a couch, or the ground, it 
has stopped holding itself up and sinks 
down with relaxed muscles — the soft 
Fig.il, pliable outline of- the bod}' fitting that 

upon which it lies. If you will notice 

this and work to express it, rest and repose will be suggested (Fig. 41). 
Draped figures come under the same rules as the nude or undraped. 

Whether the clothing be heavy or light, do not attempt to avoid difficulties by 

covering the form too much, so as to hide it. Somewhere the true proportions 

of the child should be revealed {Fig. 42). If you show only the head above a 

mass of clothing, without a hint of the form of what is beloAv it, the head might 

as well be on a stick, and the whole be called a stand 

for drapery, so far as any idea or purpose is concerned. 

Every picture should express some thought or intention, 

and so give reason for its having been made. 

There is a way of making artistic use of figure 

and drapery together, and that is, to let the folds so 

fall that the garment graces and adds to the beauty or 

sio;nificance of the fio;ure. 

As a rule to follow carefully, always choose positions 

in which some of the leading proportions of the figure 

are indicated by the lines of the drapery. Note, for 

instance, throus;!! the coverins-, such valuable and char- 

acteristic markings as the position and breadth of the 

shoulders, the line of the body under the arm, the point 

of the knee, the location of heel, the length of the 

back, or the bend of the elbow — any view taken will 

give an opportunity to show some of these places. 

Never lose sight of all the points of interest and expression which belong to 

the figure itself, for in all draped-figure drawings the character of the work 

demands that somethins: of the wonderful construction of the human form be 

seen, or indicated. 




Fiy. 42. 



THE HEAD — FRONT VIEW 



THE HEAD — FRONT VIEW. 





RAW several ovals like Fig. 43, by one quick sweep of the pencil 
or chalk. If on paper, let them be not less than a finger long ; 
if on the blackboard, a hand and a half in length. 

Repeat this exercise many times, drawing first from the 
right and then from the left, until a free flowing line and good 
form are secured. 

While not absolutely necessary to complete the line of the 
egg-shaped oval without lifting the pencil after it has once 
touched the paper, the result is likely 
to be more pleasing than one made up of several 
patched lines, and also more accurate. 

After a little time spent in drawing the ovals rapidly, 
you will, by comparison, detect where you vary most 
from the correct outline — for though so familiar and 
simple a form, you will probably not succeed with it 
at first. 

After noting where you have a tendency to go astray, 
resume the same free swift drawing, bearing in mind just 
where you need to proceed carefully, and in the work 
which follows a change for the better will be evident. 

Continue to draw and criticise, until satisfactory ovals are produced. From 
these select the best, and mark the center by a short line at each side, half-way 
between the top and bottom, as in Fig. 43. The position of the eyes in the head 

of a young child is just below 
the center, so a little below 
this half-way line they must be 
located. At first indicate them 
merely by two curved lines 
which shall stand for the up- 
per lid {Fig. 44) . 

It will be very easy for you 
to give them their correct posi- 
tion after fixing in mind the 
two following rules : first, the 
'^' ^' eyes must have a space be- 

ll to the length of an eye ; second, there must be a space two 
. of an eye between the outer corners and the outhne of the oval. 



Fig. 43. 




Fig. 44. 



tween them 
third.j.Uie le 

it; 



\ 



46 



THE HEAD — FRONT l^IEW. 





Fig. 46. 



The chin proper may next be added. It should be shown in this phm by 
another short curved Une, like those of the eyes, only "upside down," near the 
lower end {Fig. 44). 

Avoid making the chin large or heavy. Some- 
times, it is true, a peculiar kind of strength is gained 
by departing from correct form in this respect, but 
here, and always at the start, it is best to learn the cor- 
rect and normal form. 
The lower line of 
the original oval forms 
the under chin, or 
marks where it. joins 
the neck. 

Next find the point 
half-wa>- between the chin line and the eye lines, 
and there locate the end of the nose. This may 
be expressed by two small curves, or tiny half- 
circles, for the nostrils, as they are the noticeable 
part of this feature in the front view [F'kj. 45). 
^^'9- 47. The nostrils are drawn ;hus. instead of with 

nearly horizontal lines, because the nostrils open forward in a child'-s head, and 
we see into the i)assages; they assume the more hovizontal appearance, as with 
the change of maturity the ^ nose elongates and the nos- 

trils open downward. / q 

A little below the nose .^<^^JX>^ draw the curved lines for 

the mouth, as in Fig. 4o. *'*^^^-*^i,,.-'Ov^. ^^^ cnreful not to leave too. 
much space between the N^<'-^^^i_ ^^^ ""^ noi^e and the mouth. 

To the eyes now give a second curved line, nearly 

parallel to the first, to com- ^ ^ " plete the upper lid ; and 

under it, partly concealed '^' by it, place a small circle 

with a dot in the center, to represent the iris and 2)upil, or 
colored part of the eye (Fig. 46). 

Above the eyes draw curved lines for the eyebrows, and let the 
highest parts, which shoidd be near the outer ends, l)e about the 
diameter of the iris above the eye {Fig. 46). 

The ears are seen upon the original oval in two curved lines 
reaching no higher than the eyebrows and no lower than the 
nostrils {Fig. 47). In good forms, the projection of the ears 
beyond the head is not conspicuous after the hair is well-grown. 
You will find it easier to brini*: the bal)v look into the oval 
.you make the lower end, where the face proper is, seem to belong to a 
oval than the u[)per })art. This can be done by drawing the ch-'-ek 




Fig. 49. 



all 



THE HEAD— FRONT VIEW. 



47 



curves reaching from nearly opposite the eye to the chin, as shown in Fig 47 
For the drawing of tha mouth see Fig. 48. Study the lip curves very carefuUv 
For the parts of the nose see Fig. 49 ; for the eye, Fig. 50. 

The mouth is difficult to 
line, which describes three 
middle and two side divi- 
upper Hp and lower Hne of 
parts. A good exercise is 
horizontal line, then drp.w 




Fig. 50. 



draw because of the central 
parts of the upper lip ; viz., 
sions. The upper hne of 
under lip describe but two 
the following : Draw^ a 
the middle or line of union 



ot the two hps upon this Hne, letting the central part of each curve, viz., the 
middle and two sides, come a httle below the horizontal line. Add the upper 
and lower lines forming the other parts of the mouth. Give a slight tendency 
upward to the outer corners of the mouth, to insure a good expression; any 
depression of the corners below the horizontal line gives an unpleasant effect. 
In Fig. 48, the under lip is drawn with the central part of each half, clearly 
defined, distinct from the corners, for the reason that this part projects forward. 

Remember the upper lip has 
three parts, and the lower 
lip two parts. 

It is not well to attempt 
to put all the minor details 
thao belong to any feature 
into a small drawing, for the 
reason that it would require 
too many lines for the space. 
The relative value or im- 
portance of the lines could 
not be given, and the result 
would be confusing. Nor 
is it always best, from an 
artistic point of view, to 
note every minute division 
and change of surface ; some- 
times these undulations are 
so delicate that they are not 
seen, save by the most ex- 
quisite arrangement of light 
and shade, and were all to 
^^ut down in detail with the point of the pencil, some would be out of propor- 
n distinctness and therefore seem crude and coarse. 

1 whatever w^ay you look at an object, only put down such lines as are im- 
mt from the view you take. The forehead, that part which projects forward 




Fig. 51. 





Fig 52. 



Fig. 51 a. 




Fig. 52 n. 



48 



THE HEAD— FRONT J^IEIV. 



above the eyes, seems narrow in the front view, and when compared with the 
width of the cheeks miirht lead a^ou to think the heaviest or widest part of the 
head was below the forehead, yet the greatest width of the head is about at the 
top of the ears. 

The eyes are the only feature that can be enlarged without serious result, 
but even they must not be noticeable for size only. 

When the head, in front view, is looking up or down, the lines of the feat- 
ures must be drawn to conform to the curve of the oval, just as bands painted 
about an egg will curve up or down as it is turned toward or from you. Figs. 
51 and 51 a, and 52 and 52 «, will illustrate this principle. 

While working, carry all the parts of the drawing along together ; that is, 
do not finish one part before others are worked upon. Then add the finishing 
touches, while considering all the parts together — while regarding the parts as 
forming one complete whole. 




THE HEAD — SIDE-VIEW 



THE HEAD — SIDE VIEW. 




^^^^HE side view of tlie head is, perhaps, a little more 
difficult to draw than the front view, for the reason 
that several features break the outhne and seem at 
first sight to confuse it. It will not be difficult to 
understand and to draw, 
however, if the attention 
be fixed on the larger 
and more important parts ; 
then the minor features 




Fig. 53. 



will fall back to their proper relation to the whole 
form." The way to do when any form seems complex 
and difficult is to study it carefully as a whole, and 
see if a simple, general outline cannot be discerned. 
In most cases this can readily be done. 

It is a common thing for one to meet forms that seem at first sight to have 

too many jDarts and details to be managed, but 

that onlv shows that the details have the stu- 

dent's first attention, and an undue amount of it ; 

when the form continues so to appear it is proof 

that one is not attacking the subject in the right 

way to toaster it. 
Do not 

mind the 

minor parts 

very much at 

first. Always 

begin by 

overlooking; 
them. Think onlj^ of the larger sections 
and the leading directions of lines, and fix 
in mind their relative proportions. After 
that is done you may take up the rest in the 
order of thieir importance ; then they will 
fall into place in your drawing easily, and 

as they never ild have done had they been given the first or longest attention. 

^ ' di .win e head, for instance, a pupil might never get any farther than 

tb )se 'f h( i\an with that little feature before considering the larger form 




Fi(i. 54. 




Fig. 54-a. 



52 



THE HEAD — SIDE l^IEJV. 



on which it belongs and where thereon it should be placed. Little things very 
often make us blind to big things. 

We will now begin the study of the side view of the head by drawing a 

horizontal, egg-shaped oval {Fig. 53). 

Under the small end of this oval, lapping 
half-way over it," and slanting toward the large 
end, draw another and smaller oval as shown in 
Fkj b4. 

Erase the lapping portions of both ovals, 
and there will remain the general foundation 
form of the head {Fig. 54-«), showing plainly 
the two large and important divisions, the upper, 
or cerebral, and the lower, or facial. 

It will not 
alwiiys be 




Fig. 55. 



necessary. 



of 





1- l;i 



course, to start each side-view drawing of the 

head with the ovals as in Figs. 53 and 54, but 

this method is given as perhaps the easiest way 

for a beginner to master the correct form. 

Before scoino- farther it will be well to fix 

in mind certain principles : first, that the upper 

or cerebral 
section is 
larger than 
the lower, 

or lacial section ; second, that the narrowest 
end of the upper part is at the frout or fore- 
head, which, however, must never be pointed ; 
third, that the highest part of the cerebral 
section is a little back of the center. (In 
the adult head the higrh- 
est part is farther for- 
ward.) 

We have already 
learned, in front view, 

that the eye in the child's head is situated a little below the 

middle, and we find in the side view that the point where 

the facial joins the cerebral section {Fig. 54) is just below 

the center, so there the eye must be drawu. as in Fig. 55. 

The chin maybe added next, just iu front of the lowest part of t (C facial 

section, as shown iu Fig. 56. The bottom of the facial oval, just bacK of the 



Fig. 57. 




Fhi. r.a. 



THE' HEAD— SIDE VIEW. 



53 




chin, forns the double or under chin, which is always more or less to be seen. 
About half-wsy from the eye to the chin locate the end of the nose. The 
line between the eye and the end of the nose must be drawn as a continuation 

of the forehead-hne {Fig. 56). It is always concave, for the 
reason that the nasal bones are not grown. The end of the 
nose seems to turn up, and the nostrils here, as in the front 
view, open forward. 

Tiie vpper Up is to be drawn as a continuation of the 
line of the nose, 
slightly hollowing, 
Fig. 59. as in Fig. 57. The 

under lip, forming 
with the upper lip, the mouth, is to 
be drawn as a continuation upward 
of the chin-line, as in Fig. 57. In 
the profile of the child face the lips 
project but little beyond the cheek- 
line. The place for the ear is near 
wh^re the cerebral and facial lines 
unite at the back.- This feature 
seems set low on the head ; the top 
reaches about as high as the eyebrow, 
the bottom as low as the nostril ; the 
top is a little further back than 
the bottom {Fig. 57). The lines of 
the hair may added as in Fig. 57. ^*^" ^^' 

For the detail of the eye, see Fig. 58 ; for the 
detail of the ear, see Fig. 59. 

Fig. 60 shows how the neck connects the head 
with the shoulders. Notice the slanting dotted 
lines, which indicate how much hio-her the neck 
is at the back than at the front. 

The dotted lines in front of the faces in Figs. 
57 and 60 show the ordinary angle of lines drawn 
from the forehead to the end of the nose, and 
from there to the end of the chin. 

In this connection it will be interestina; to com- 
pare the child face and the adult face in Fig. 60-aj. 
and note the differences and the chang-es that come 
with age — the higher forehead, the projecting chin, the convex line of the nose, 
the nostril opening downward, even backward, and the thin, compressed lips. 





Fig. 60-a. 



54 



THE HEAD — SIDE I^IEIV. 



Old age and infancy express two extremes of dependenc hen the fig- 

ures are erect, both inclme forward. The difference of 1 ;nt in these 

forms is the following : in old age the outline is angular, the sharpness being 
carefully softened in effect by the suggestion of a curve ; while in infancy the 
outline is all curves, without a suggestion of an angle. 

The most delicate and exquisite appreciation of sentiment is needed to en- 
able one to represent this most difficult of all; \az., old age in its perfection. 
The baby figure forms its natural and beautiful contrast. * 




THE HEAD, BACK VIEW AND EXPRESSION 



THE HEAD — BACK VIEW, AND EXPRESSION. 





OR the head in back view we have again to take the egg- 
shaped oval. We add to it a curved Une, as in Fig. 61, for 
the base of the head. This we know to be opposite the ear, 
and we place the ear-lines accordinglj. 

The young child carries the head thrown a little forward, 
covering some of the neck in front and side views, but at the 
back its wdiole length and width can 
be seen. It is always a small section 
— giving the feeling that the head 
is a little heavy for its support. 
The shoulders and top of back should now be added 
as in Fig. 62. From the base of the head, down to the 
top of the back, draw a line which shall stand for the 
spinal column, or middle line of the neck. On either 
side add another. These side lines give the place occu- 
pied by an important muscle, the trapezius, but slightly 
developed in the child, however (Fig. 62). Still another 
line placed outside each of these defines an important *^' 

muscle at the side of the neck called the sterno-mastoid (Fig. 63). In the adult 
these same parts are as shown in Fig. 64. 

The muscular forms are all under an integumentary or soft covering in the 

child. Be very careful 
not to have the neck 
long, or too wade. The 
shoulders at the back are 
high, and often repre- 
sented b}^ a curved line. 
At the top of the back, 
near the neck, is a fold 
of integument (Fig. 64-a). 
We now come to the 
subject of facial exj)res- 
sion. 

The expression most 
ral to the baby face is one of inquiry, and it assumes a form that to a 
lin extent is passive. 
Vt times it seems as if the child was having great thoughts about everything, 




Fig. 62. 



Fig. 63. 



58 



THE HEAD — BACK VIEW, AND EXPRESSION. 



and again it seems as if he had none at all, but sat waiting for some to come, the 
face changing from the one to the other as circumstances determine. To 
represent happiness, displeasure or grief 
in the child face the change of lines made 
in the adult to produce these expressions 
must be used, but with greater care, since lit- 
tle Hberty can be taken with the form of the 

features. Any 
approach to ex- 
travagant expres- 
sion would not 
only be coarse, 
but wholly out of 
place in the sub- 
ject. 

Straight o r 
horizontal lines 
used for the feat- 
ures always stand 
for a quiet or 

passive expression. We will suppose, at the start, 
that the prevaihng lines are horizontal,- that we may the more readily note the 
changes in expression produced by varying the directions of the lines. 

To begin with displeasure, the first change is to lower 

the inner ends of the eye- 
brows, letting them approach so 





Fig. 64. 



Fig. 6-i-a. 




Fig. 65. 




Fig. aq. 




as to cause a slight wrinkle 

over the nose {Fig. 65). The corners of the mouth 

are lowered also, and the nostrils raised, as shown in 

Fig. 66, and in the completed drawing, Fig. 67. z-,-^. 57. 

For the expression of pleasure, raise the eyebrows 
(Fig. 68). Also raise the corners of the mouth, and let the flesh of the cheeks 
press up against the eyes, as in Fig. 6!), and in tlie completed diawing, Fi(/. 7(l- 



V. 



THE HEAD^ BACK VIEW. AND EXPRESSION. 



59 



For 'grief, raise the inner end of the eyebrow, lower the outer part of the 
upper lid of the eye {Fi/j. 71), and turn the corners of the mouth down — also 

the lines at the side of the nose — as shoAvn in Fig. 72, 
and in the completed drawing. Fig. 73. 

For side views of the face 





Fiff. 69. 




Fig. 70. 



Fiff. 68. 



with these different ex- 
pressions, see the outlines 

in Fig. 74., and the more detailed drawings in Fig. 75. 
The eye of the art student should ever be alert — 
noting the various expressions of children's faces on the street, in the car, at the 
public gathering — seeking to discover what lines and combinations of lines 
produce each expression — and then, at home, he should endeavor to reproduce 
these expressions from memory. 

In the time between the seeing and the drawing, the 
minor details are likely to fade and be forgotten, and 

only the more important and 
primary lines remain in mind. 





Fig. 72. 



Fig. 71. 

There are other 
ways^ of telling what 

a child is thinking about and how he is 
feeling than by seeing his face, though any 
disturbance or change of feeling most frequently ^.^^^ 

shows itself there first. The attitude of the whole 

fio-ure too is very full c^ meaning. Indeed, all the movements of a child are 
honest portrayals of and should be carefully noted. 




60 



THE HEAD — BACK VIEW, AND EXPRESSION. 



It will be found as one goes on that the nearer the work approaches 
perfection the greater will seem the least mistake ; one will not, as at first, 
feel the delight at a little good, but the disturbance at a little wrong. Do not 
let this discourage you, for sometimes the trouble may be only a hair-breadth 
that is between your failure and your success. 







Fig. 74. 



Fig. 75. 



THE ARM, FORE-ARM AND HAND 



THE ARM, FORE ARM AND HAND. 





AVING so far regarded the arm, fore-arm and hand only 
as a section of the whole fig-ure, we must now studv 
them in detail. 

The arm proper is the part from the shoulder to the 
elbow, the fore-arm that from the elbow to the wrist ; 
these two sections, with the wrist and hand, are usually 
referred to collectively as the upper extremity. 

The upper extremity is, on the whole, a small divi- 
sion, its full integumentary outline making it seem 
shorter than it is, and even appearing to interfere with 
its ready use. This is notably the case when the abdominal line is well rounded ;, 
as when a baby is seated on the lap of nn adult. Owing to the 
full integumentary development no deep indentations occur in the 
outline. Where one might be expected, a fold, or extra fullness 
of flesh, will be found to fill the depression. In the chubby child 
hand and arm this is particularly noticeable. 

To clearly understand the construction and movement of the 
arm, one should first study the framckwork, or bones. Like all 
parts of the skeleton, they are marvelous in construction, and in 
the adaptation of each to its special purpose. 

First, noting the length of the whole section, we see that when 
the arm hangs by the side the finger tips reach to the middle of 
the thio-h. 

In the child, the arm is a little shorter than the fore-arm — the 
reverse being the proportion in the adult. 

In the arm there is one long bone, the humerus, from shoulder 
to elbow. In the fore-arm there are two long bones, the ulna and the 
radius, from elbow to wrist. In the wrist there are eight small 
bones, arranged in two rows. In the solid part of the hand there 
are five slender bones, extending from wrist to fingers; in each 
finger, three bones ; in the thumb, two bones. The general form 
and arrangement of these bones is shown in Fig. 76. 

It must be borne in mind that these parts, and all parts of the 

frame or skeleton, are not of the same size and strength in the 

child as in the adult ; indeed, you can quite readily imagine 

the extreme delicacy of the bones at the age when their growth has only begun. 

The position of the arm in Fig. 76 shows all the bones distinctly, but in most 



li..... 




64 



THE ARM, FORE-ARM AND HAND. 



positions the bones of the fore-arm are crossed. As a guide to their location, 
keep in mind that above the Httle finger is the lower and smaller end of the 

ulna, and that the upper and larger end of the ulna 
makes the elbow projection. Above the thumb is 
the lower and larger end of the radius, the up])er 
and smaller end of which does not enter into the 
mechanism of the elbow joint, but wheels about, as 
it were, on the ulna. To repeat : the bone that is 
largest at the elbow, and undoes the joint with the 
lower end of the arm bone, is the smallest at the wrist ; 
while the one that is smallest at the elbow is laro;- 
est and ino^t important at the wrist. 

Eaise Aour hand easily up before you, or let it 

rest lightly upon the table beside you, and observe 

that two thirds of the back of the hand goes in one 

direction, or plane, and the other third (or tliiunb 

section) goes in another. This makes it possible to 

^ "" use the thumb in connection with any or all of the 

fingers, which could not be done were the arrangement like that in the foot. 

Note carefully the proportions of the hand : that the length, from wrist to 




finger tips, is twice the 
opposite the longest, or 
i)art of the hand is long:- 
of the hand is Ion o'er 

O 

part, than on the back, or 
The length of the fin- 
side than on the inside. 




Fiff. 78. 



width, as in Fi(j. 77 ; that 
second finscer, the solid 
est ; that the solid part 
on the inside, or palmar 
dorsal part. 

gers is greater on the back 
because the soft part of 
up on the first section of 



the palm presses part way 

the fingers, as shown in F'ir/. 78. Examine your own hand and this will be evident. 

The tipping up of the ends of the fingers which is frequently seen in a 
baby's hand, and is found so often a characteristic feature 
of a picturesque hand, is in part due to the fact that the 
flosh on the underside of the ends of the fing-ers is decid- 
edly full at the point opposite the lower end, 
or beginning, of the nail. The flatness 
of the nail increases the appearance of the 
bending up of the imder line of finger 
toward the end. The fingers in this kind of 
hand must be long and tapering. 

The fingers, especiallj^ of a baby or young 
child, are always larger at the base, where they start from the solid part of the 
hand, than at the tips. In a very | lump baby's hand the width often soi'ins to 




Fig. 79. 



THE ARM, FORE-ARM AND HAND. 



65 




Ui 



n&. 



^.m. 



n<£. 



Fig 80. 



overbalance the length, because the broad or base end is so very large in pro- 
portion to the small end of the finger. In a plump child's hand the flesh rounds 
out between the knuckles, while at 
the knuckles the bending of the 
joints and the attachment of the 
muscles cause depressions called dim- 
ples. At the finger tips, however, 
there is little more than the frame, 
•hence at this stage of bone growth 
they are tiny. 

For the arm and fore-arm in 
different positions, refer to Figs. 79 
and 80. 

Observe the fold of flesh at the 
baby wrist, and take note of the 
little creases in the palm of the hand, and wherever, from the fullness of the 
flesh, one part folds upon another. 

Everywhere the joints are carefully protected, and you will need to study 
them all the more carefully as the form is not boldly indicated. Bear in mind 
that wherever the outline runs to a joint it touches a fine or delicately molded 

part, instead of a clumsy or heavy 
form (Fig. 81). 

The elbow joint, or upper end 
of ulna, is but slightly seen, ap- 
pearing most prominent when the 
arm is bent. The place is marked 
by a cavity or dimple when the 
arm is straio;ht. 

The usual flatness of wrist 
found in the adult or gro wing- 
youth, is almost lost sight of in 
the baby. 

When drawing from or simply 
observing; the life, notice the 
slight difference in size from 
shoulder to wrist; the change, 
however, must be carefully noted, 
and the peculiar modeling of each 
section studied well in order to give the proper character to each part. 

When the child's hand is doubled, see how nearly it resembles a ball ; and 
notice the flatne -he part between the knuckles and first joint compared 

with the roundn the back of hand. The forefinger is often used very 




Fig 81. 



66 



THE ARM, FORE-ARM AND HAND, 



independently of the other fingers. In some hands the two thumb joints are not 
graded in their shape into the larger section or ball of the thumb, but are so 
much smaller they appear to be set abruptly into the heavy mass of the hand. 

The entire child-form is full of exquisite elusive lines which must be caught 
and fixed on paper if we are to express the charming spirit of the whole pro- 
portion and action. 

The comparatively straight lines, and the angles of later life, are hardly 
hinted at in the child-figure, the outline, from all points of view, being made 
up of multitudinous arcs or segments of circles. 

It would be well if, when working from life, the student could feel that each 
division of the figure had an individuality that claimed his conscientious study ; 
as if each part were a person, or had a personality ; for to slight the beauties or 
peculiar features of any section, is to rob it of its claim for appreciation. 




THE THIGH, LEG AND FOOT 



X 



THE THIGH, LEG AND FOOT. 






^ 



ASSING from the upper extremities to the lower, we find that, 
like the arm, the leg is in several sections : the thigh, corre- 
sponding to the arm proper ; the leg, corresponding to the 
forearm ; the foot, corresponding to the wrist and hand. 

As with the arm, it is well to study at the start the under- 
lying framework. In the thigh there is one long bone called 
the femur, extending from hip to knee. In the leg there are 
two long bones, from knee to foot, called the tibia and the 
fibula {Fig. 82). The tibia is on the inside of the leg, and 
is much the larger of the two. 
Just at the knee, where the thigh and leg bones articulate, there 
is a small bone called the patella, or knee-pan. It helps in the action 
of the .muscles, and protects the joint {Fig. 82). 

The point where the leg unites with the foot is called the ankle. 

In the solid part of the foot there are seven small bones, which 

form the heel and that part of the foot on which the leg bones rest, 

and five long bones, wdiich lead to the five toes. These twelve 

together form the heel and instep [Fig. 83). 

In each of the toes, except the great toe, there are three free 

bones. Like the thumb, the great toe has 
but two free bones (Fig. 83). 

The ankle bones seen projecting upon 
the outline (Fig. 83 a), are not formed by 
the small bones of the foot, but are the 
lower ends of the two long bones of the 
leg. The end of the tibia forms the inner 
ankle projection, the end of the fibula 
makes the outer projection. The inner 
or tibia projection is always higher than 
the outer, coming just above the instep, 
'■ w^hile the outer or fibula projection falls 
just below the instep. 

In all forms there are certain parts, particular 
lines, curves or angles, projections or indentations, 
which are most essential in giving the character. 

"^Yhen beginning to draw anything that is difficult, say to yourself : " If I 
oblio-ed to tell this form in three lines, which three should I take ? " After 




■f^ 



Fig. 82. 



Fig. 83. 



Fig. 83 a. 



70 



THE THIGH, LEG AND FOOT, 





Fig. 84. 



deciding upon them, allow yourself to add to these first three two other lines, 
and see if you cannot in them get the essentials of the whole form. A pupil 
cannot too often be reminded of this wny of proceeding when starting upon a 

difficult task. It helps to .simplify any 
seeming confusion of small parts, and gives 
one a ground on which to attempt work. 
In the three views of the lower extremitv, 

%■' ^ 

front, side and back, in Fig. 84, observe that 
the outline on the outside is almost an un- 
broken line — two lono- curves with slight 
indentation at the knee. The inside outline, 
however, is much broken, that is, the direc- 
tion is often changed. 
f^'^ ^ ^\ ^ The knee is protected by a mass of integu- 

ment, and is some- 
times a heavy sec- 
ion. The indentations about the knee should be 
irefullv studied. 

Observe that the ])oints where the thigh and 
le leg; be^-in on the outside are hiuher than where 
ley begin on the inside ; but at the lower end of the 
ig, at the ankle, the opposite condition will be found, 
lakino- the inside lenij-th of the entire limb shorter 
lan the outside length, in both back and front views 

[Flcj. 84 a). 

The ankle bones 
seem to clasp the 
top of the foot. 

Never allow the ankle ancf foot to be heavy, 
though they should be well covered with 
integument. 

In studying the foot mc must first notice 
the wav in which it starts from the leo;- Ob- 
serve that it begins with a slio:litlv curved 
line (Fig. 85). When the bones are small, 
and the integument full, the connection will 
be more like that in Fig. 85 a. If you are 
always careful to ]'»lace this curve as it should 
mr drawinirs. vou will avoid one of the difficulties in makimji: Ji good 
fote also that the point where the leg unites with the foot at the back. 

lower thnn where th(> leg ends on the instep [Fig. 85). 
.Jerstand the construction of the foot, refer again to the bonv frame in 





Fig. Si a. 



85. 



Fig. 85 o. 



b 

ar 
or 



THE THIGH, LEG AND FOOT. 



71 




^.'ZZ'C' 



Fi;;. 86. 




Fiy. 8G a. 



Fig. 83. This shows the way in which the toes are set upon the body of the 
foot. Notice the length of the great toe, and the larger length of the one next 
it, and then the way in which the rest of the toes steadily shorten, one after the 

other, to the little toe. The line where the toes unite 
with the foot does not change so rapidly as the line of 
the end of the toes {Fig. S3 a). 

The views giving the chief characteristics of the form of 
the foot are the outside and inside views {Figs. 86 and 86 a, 
87 and 87 a). In both these it will be seen that the top line 
of the foot has four different planes, or five if the second division of the toes is 
counted {Figs. 86 and 87). These changes of direction are always more or less 
plainly seen, and if kept in mind will aid greatly in making any drawing of the foot. 

Three essentials are to be noted in the outside view 
of the foot : first, all the toes are seen ; second, the line 
of the sole is about straight, that is, it fits the ground ; 
third, the ankle bone, being the lower one, is drawn a 
little below the top of the instep {Figs. 86 and 86 a). 
Three essentials are' also to be noted on the inside : first, 
only the great toe and a bit of the second are seen ; 

second, the ground line of the foot is raised half-way between the ball of the 

foot and the heel; third, the ankle bone on this side, being the higher, is 

>^-~~^.__^ drawn a little above the instep. 

.x;;;;;,/ / The toes are sometimes long and thin compared with 

^^;^Z^ I t,he round mass of the foot. Again they are doubled up, 

•— ^^'*--^- — -- ^ and appear but a short proportion added to, but not de- 

^'^* ^^' tracting from, the cushion-like roundness of the foot. 

The heel is quite independent of the other parts, being always round and 
harder than the rest — quite rosy, too, in color. The foot upon the ground fits 
more closely to the hard surface than does the foot in the adult. 

Havincr uow s^one over all the parts of the child-figure, and studied the 
more or less in detail, the pupil must go on and study 
from life carefully for himself. He must go further 
than the teacher has taken him, or can take him. by 
o-ivino- his own interpretation to what he sees. 

Whenever in the company of children, watch them, 
observe form, outline, action, expression. It is not 
easv to measure how much of the real spirit of their 
life and of every movement we may be able to capture by th 
Do not feel obliged to remember to the hair's breadth the deta 
thing you study ; but while you watch and they play, note in the' 
which is purely and essentially child-like or baby-like. See, v 
to do a difficult thing, how unlike a man or a youth they at^ 




Fiff. 87 



•lod. 

ry- 

hat) 

try 

I'ote 



72 



THE THIGH, LEG AND FOOT. 



how from certain positions they invariably fall, and the positions in which they 
can stand. 

Thongh you may not be able to remember, all at once, the little characteris- 
tic bits gained here and there from this observation will store themselves away 
in your mind, especially those you most admire, and when they are needed they 
will come from the storehouse of vour memory, and enter the lines to live 
aorain in some charmino; creation of vour own. 

Such application is wliat you need, rather than to set yourself to commit to 
memory stiif rules, to make a mere machine of yourself. If you love nature, if 
you admire form and delight in action, and can observe well, then let people 
see what you discover; and trust your feeling — that which says stop here or 
go on there. 




FORESHORTENING AND COMPOSITION 



FORESHORTENING AND COMPOSITION 




I HEN any one is standing erect and facing 
us, with the arms hanging at the sides, 
it is easy to make a drawing of that 
person, but if one arm is raised toward 
us, or a foot Ufted as if to take a stej) 
forward, a change takes place which 
makes the task difficult. 

Curiously, the arm raised toward us, 
while really the same length as before, 
has apparently lost part of its length. 
In the same way, the leg that is lifted seems, in one section or more, to have 
lost in length, because, in bending, the full right^angle view is changed to an 
oblique view. 

This apparent lessening of length, when looking at an object obliquely, is 
called foreshortening. 

If we notice the lifted leg carefully, comparing it with the limb still unmoved, 
we shall see that the knee, instead of being by the side of the other, is now 
somewhat higher ; and a similar change will be noted at the foot. 

In any position the human figure may take there will be more or less fore- 
shortening. Here again comes in the valuable help to be had in all work from 
comparison. Compare one part with another — the length and width of the 
part in action, with the length and width of the 
corresponding part on the other side which is quiet. 
Whenever drawing from life (and particularly 
when there is much foreshortening), begin by 
studying the entire bulk — compare the whole 
height with the whole width, and place the result 
upon paper. Do the same with the component 
parts — body, head and limbs ; and after the large 
divisions are all secured, and their leading pro- 
portions recorded, note the small divisions with 
their individual proportions as they appear, going 
from the larger, always, to the smaller. 

Now take an example of foreshortening, a child sitting on a couch, for in- 
stance. (It will be well to practice considerably with the plans already given, 
before working from life.) Imagine the exact pose, and, when it is clearly in 
mind, place dots on the paper where the joints should come (Fig. 88). 




Fig. 89. 



76 



FORESHORTENING AND COMPOSITION. 




Firj. 90. 



Draw the head in its proper slant, and then the plan of the rest of the figure 
simply by single lines (Fig. 88), being guided by the dots which locate the 
joints. The solid sections are indicated by the dotted outline. Next draw the 
child as in Fig. 89, reversing the order and letting 
the single lines be the imaginary ones, and drawing 
the solid sections, with due reference to the dots at the 
joints. After this it will be comparatively easy to 
accomplish a more finished figure, which shall express 
all that you had in your first idea (Fig. 90). In 
Fig. 90 note the apparent shortening of the thigh 
compared with the leg. 

These gradual steps are a good means to employ 
that the difficulty met in attempting new and com- 
plicated work may not lead you to forget the impor- 
tance of starting intelligently and keeping the separate 
sections and proportions clearly in mind to the end. 

For another example, see Fig. 91. Starting with the one governing line of 
action, as shown by the dotted line, pose the figure in the mind so that the 
solid sections will carry out this irlea. Proceed as before, by the successive 

steps, to the completed result in Fig. 92. 

Continue exercises of this sort till foreshortening be- 
comes familiar and easilv manao-ed. Foreshortenino* is 
always considered a most difficult part of ficrure drawinsT, 
but you may be sure that you have the key to the problem 
if you will l)ut locate the joints first, as thej' occur in rela- 
You can then build readilv the bulk of the solid sections 
from these important starting points. The location of joints and the line indicat- 
ing pose are the first essentials in drawing a foreshortened figure. 

Seldom, even if always drawins; from still-life, is one satisfied 
to work for form alone, for without expressing some 
idea or sentiment the result would be monotonous 
indeed. Composition is the grouping of ob- 
jects and persons, with accessories, to express 
idea and sentiment. A good composition is _ 
one with no irrelevant featiu-es, one where , 
everything, even to minor details, helps toward 
the expression of the central idea. 

Some young artists who wish to compose 
pictures of their own feel the lack of ideas ; others hesitate over the way to 
express their ideas by drawing. While modesty is to be commended in a 
student, too much diffidence is a great drawback, as often in that case one feels 




Fig. 91. 

tion to each other. 




Fig. 92. 



FORESHORTENING AND COMPOSITION. 



IT 




Fig. 93. 



sure he cannot do a thing before having made a reasonable effort to accomplish 
it — fails for lack of courage even to begin. 

The desire to do indicates that there is some 

/""^ j* , ) power stirring for means of expression which 

( ^ 2 ^J^^!^ {) should be given freedom. It is not impossible 

m- y -''=*^^<:^v »' ^y that beautiful and noble conceptions may come 

from earnest faithful workers who as yet have 
done little. Each one owes himself a fair trials 
at least. 

It is well at first to take some simple subject, 
make a rough sketch, and then turn critic, ex- 
amining it as a whole, and then in detail. For 
example, let us suppose the subject is " Mary and 
her Lamb," that scene of the familiar tale where 
both are on the way to school, walking side by side along a path, a stone wall 
beyond them, and the school-house seen across a distant field. Make a rapid 
rough sketch, then consider it carefully — the main 
points, Mary, the lamb, the school-house. See if the 
general placing of these three is agreeable. Do not 
huddle all together, or let them fall in line one 
beyond the other. Rather let the lamb fall behind 
Mary, and the school-house in the distance to the 
side toward which the two are moving. Consider 
the aore of the o-irl — and the lamb should not be 
a sheep. Give Mary a costume suited to school 
wear. The lamb should be the nearer of the 
two, the taller figure of the girl beyond. The 
position of Mary and the lamb should express their affection one for the other. 
Take other subjects in the same way — arrange and rearrange the parts in 

your plan until a satisfactory picture is pro- 
duced. After a time one will come to have 
quite decided opinions and ideas concerning 
a few subjects at least, and before long there 
will be the desire to choose and work out 
subjects entirely original. 

Choose direct plain subjects. Quite as 
much can often be expressed by a single 
figure as b}^ many. When more than one 
figure is needed in a picture, make all 
become as one ; that is, let the secondary 
figures be added to help carry out the idea which the central or primary 
figure alone cannot fully express. Have all harmoniously arra -^ xr^^.^ 




Fig. 94. 




Fig. 95. 



78 



FORESHORTENING AND COMPOSITION. 



your intention clearly in mind so that it may be plain to those who look 
at the work. 

Next to getting a good idea is the need of giving it the best expression that 
is possible. Do not be led away from this by working up details too carefully 
at first. Never 
let the points of 
interest be scat- 
tered over too 
much space. If 
you find that 
you have ideas 
enough for five 
pictures, then 
make five differ- 
ent pictures ; do 

not put all into one and make it crowded and confused. The figures should 
be as sentences to tell a story, and ought to be made very eloquent. Try and 
tell short stories on paper in the clear language of line and form. 

Before beginning to draw, think of the shape the whole must have when 
done. It may be well to start with single-line figures, arranging them so that 
they will all help to express the leading thought {Fig. 93). Then give the 
solid sections [Fig. 94), and after that the solid sections draped {Fig. 95). 

In a more elaborate picture, after determining the general shape of the com- 
position as a whole, indicate the leading lines which the figures shall conform to 




Fig. 96. 




Fig. 97. 



— the most important groups first, and then the minor groups and single figures 
as in Fig. 96. Then develop the details as in Fig. 97. 

Make the picture a unit, not by one form, but by arranging a variety of 
forma harmoniously as one whole. 

When any fhffioulty is met in the drawing, go back to the simplest form, 



FORESHORTENING AND COMPOSITION. 



79 



the single-line figure, and work by degrees from that to the finished figure. 
It is commonly thought that drawing is only tor a pastime, that its pleasures 
can all be had easily. This is a serious mistake. A pupil is kept at the study 
of music for a long time, constantly practicing over and over endless exercises, 
and if at the end of years he can perform the compositions of another with 
credit, then the time has been well spent. In drawing, where so much is to 
come from familiarity with materials, from knowledge and originality in the 
artist, creditable results cannot be expected unless one gives to the work long, 
earnest and loving labor. 




J ' J ' i > 

1 ) J J J } ^ 



) ' J , J J ' 
1 1 ' 1 ' > 
1 i\\ " 

1 > I'll 
l' 1 11 , 



i i' ' "' 

11, 

1111 1 j> 



1 1 1 1 1 ii 1 > , 1 , J, , 



w 




\ 



■*■■■■•-■■ '''"I"- ':fli^ 






