


FAIRY MOONBEAM'S 




CHILDREN S BOOK 
COLLECTION 



LIBRARY OF THE 

UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA 

LOS ANGELES 







The Princess fainting, after piercing her hand with the Spindle. 

THERE were, many, many years ago, a king and queen 
who bad no children, which made them very unhappy in- 
deed. Hoping by some means or other to have an heir, 
they agreed to consult all the fairies they could hear of : 
rows, pilgrimages, every thing was tried, but without 
success. 

Some time after this, it was proclaimed that the queen 
was going to have a child, and shortly after a princess was 
born. The christening was the most sumptuous imagina- 



leaping Beauty conveyed to her couc 




able ; and seven fairies, being all that could be found in the 
country, were invited to be her godmothers; so that each of 
them might bestow upon her a gift, as was the custom in 
those days. 

When the ceremony of baptism was over, a splendid 
entertainment was prepared for the fairies ; before each of 
whom was set a magnificent cover of massive gold, with 
knife, fork, and spoon, set with diamonds and rubies, all 
of the most curious workmanship. 

As the company were about to place themselves at the 
table, an old fairy, who had been forgotten for many years, 
entered the banquet-room. The king immediately ordered 
a cover to be brought for her, but it could not be of mas- 
sive gold, because only seven had been made. 



3 

The old fairy, seeing that her cover was not so handsome 
as those of the other fairies, muttered that she would be 
revenged. A young fairy, who sat near her, and heard her, 
resolved to prevent, as far as she could, the harm intended 
by the old fairy. The fairies now began to bestow their 
gifts on the infant princess ; the first said that she should 
be most beautiful ; the second, that she should be very wit- 
ty; the third, that she should have enchanting grace ; the 
fourth, that she should dance delightfully ; the fifth, that 
she should sing like a nightingale ; and the sixth, that she 
should excel in playing on every musical instrument. 

The old fairy now stepped forward and said, "The prin- 
cess shall pierce her hand with a spindle, and die of the 
wound." The young fairy, who had concealed herself till 
just now, stepped forward and said, "Do not afflict your- 
selves, O king and queen, the princess shall not die of her 
wound ; she shall only sleep for a hundred years, at the 
end of which time she shall be awakened by an amiable 
young prince." 

The king, anxious to prevent the injury to his daughter, 
caused it to be proclaimed that no person should hereafter 
use a spindle. 

As the princess grew up, all the graces bestowed upon 
her began to show 'themselves, and she became more and 
more engaging. One day, she went into an apartment in 
a remote part of the palace, in which an old woman was 
spinning with a spindle. The princess, never having seen 
one before, took the spindle, and the end of it pierced her 
hand ; when she instantly fell into a profound sleep. 

The old woman was greatly frightened, and called for 
assistance ; her cries speedily brought the king and queen, 
who had the princess removed to her own apartment, and 
laid on a couch. The kind fairy who had saved her from 
death, now appeared, and waving her wand, caused every 
person in the palace to fall asleep, so that they might awake 
with the princess, and be ready to attend her, when her 
long sleep was over. 




The splendid Banquet given to tl 



Many years passed away, and a dense forest grew up 
around the palace, which almost hid it from view. When 
the hundred years had elapsed, a prince and his followers 
were hunting near the spot ; and as he came near to the 
trees, they separated to let him pass. Onward he passed, 
the trees closing after him, and at last he arrived at the 
palace gates. He entered, but the silence which reigned 
within, quite startled him ; however, he took courage, and 
passed through several rooms, in which every person he saw 
was fast asleep. At length the prince entered a splendid 
apartment, where lay, on an elegant couch, the most beau- 
tiful lady he had ever beheld ; with intense admiration he 
gazed upon her for some time, and falling on one knee, he 




ries at the Baptism of the Princess. 



gently took the hand of the princess, and pressed it to his 
lips. 

The enchantment was now ended ; the princess opened 
her eyes, and with a look of tenderness said, "Is it yon, 
prince ? how long I have waited for you ! n The prince, 
delighted at these words, assured her that he loved her bet- 
ter than he did himself. A long time was sweetly passed in 
conversation, and the prince declared how happy he felt in 
having been the means of releasing one so beautiful from 
such a cruel enchantment. " Ah ! dear prince," replied she, 
" It was you who were my companion during my long sleep. 
I very well knew that he who should end my enchantment 
would be the handsomest of men, and that he would love 




The Prince and his attendants hunting near Sleeping Beauty's Palace. 

me even more than he loved himself ; and the moment I 
saw you, I recollected your face." 

The attendants of the princess awoke at the same time, 
and commenced their several duties as if nothing had hap- 
pened : even the fire, at which the joints and game had 
been roasting, suddenly re-kindled ; and the cook bustled 
about to have all things ready at what he supposed to be 
the proper time. 

The prince now assisted the princess to rise. She was 
magnificently dressed ; but he wisely did not tell her that 
her clothes were in the style of those worn by his great 
grandmother ; however, they became the princess so well, 
that she looked exceedingly beautiful. 




The Princess taking refreshment after her long sleep. 

He took her hand, and conducted her to the apartment 
in which the refreshments were served, and as soon as they 
were seated at the table, the musicians, who were in readi- 
ness with their instruments, began to play some airs ; which, 
although very old, were nevertheless extremely agreeable. 
In fact, the prince felt himself so happy, with the old-fash- 
ioned appearance of every thing that met his view, which- 
ever way he looked, and which seemed to borrow a charm 
from the beautiful princess, that he was completely filled 
with pleasure. 

The prince and princess passed the evening, greatly de- 
lighted with each other's company, and agreed that the 
chaplain should marry them that night. The ceremony 




The Prince conducting the beautiful Princess to his father's palace. 

accordingly took place ; and the next day, the prince con 
ducted his bride, accompanied by her attendants, in grand 
state, to his father's palace. The trees which surrounded 
the palace where the Sleeping Beauty had reposed for one 
hundred years, were mostly gone, just a few remained ; and 
triumphal arches had been put up, for the procession to 
pass under, but who placed them there was a mystery. 

Some supposed it to have been the work of the good 
fairy who had so long watched over and taken such great 
care of the Sleeping Beauty ; but no one knew for certain. 
Of this we may rest assured, that the prince and his beau- 
tiful wife passed a long and happy life. 



McLOUOHLIIV 

30 BEEKMAN STREET, NEW YORK, 

MANUFACTURERS of TOY BOOKS, GAMES, &c, 



PAPER DOLLS-BOOK FORM, 

SERIES No. L 10 KINDS, Viz, 
stei Fine, Baby, 

Flora Fair, Dolly, 

Minnie Millet, Hattie, 

Little Pet, Lizzie, 

Little Fred, May Day. 

5 Cents each. 



SERIES No. 2. 12 KINDS, Viz. 
Kitty Black, Minty Green, 

Lilly Beers, Emma White, 

Little Lady, Man; Gray, 

Fanny Fair, / Sarah Brown, 

Rose Bud, Ruby Rose, 

Ella Hall, Anna DolL 

10 Cents each. 

SERIES No. 3. 12~KINDS, Viz. 
Carrie Grant, Susies Pets, 

Victoria, Mrs. Tom Thumb, 

Eugenia, Mr. Tom Thumb, 

Grace Lee, Minnie Warren, 

Clara West, Commodore Nutt, 

Cinderella, Nellie North. 

15 Cents each. 



SERIES No. 4. 4 KINDS, Viz. 
Red Riding Hood, Ida May, 

' Goody Two Shoes, Jessie Jones. 

25 Cents each. 



PAPER FURNITURE. 

Parlor Set Bed Room Set 

Drawing Room Set 15 Cents each. 

Bed Room Set small, Parlor Set small, 

10 Cents each. 

Beautiful Play House, 1 Room, Parlor. 62 eta. each 
Beautiful Play House, 1 Room, Parlor and outside 
-) $1. each. 

Beautiful Play House, 2 Rooms, Parlor and bed-room. 

$1.25. each. 



