






















THE TOBOGGHN SLIDE 


THE NIGHT BEEORE 
CHRISTMAS 


AND OTHER POPULAR STORIES POR CHILDREN 



HANDSOMELY fLLUSTRATED 


Copyright, 1903, by W, B. Conkey Company 


Chicago 

W. B. CONKEY COMPANY 



















SSofore Christmas* 



the chimney with care* 

In the hope that St Nicholas 
soon would be there 0 
The children were nestled all 
snug in their beds, . 

While visions of sugar-plums 
danced in their heads 
And mamma m her kerchief, 
and I in my cap. 


T W A S the 

night before 
Christmas* 
and all through 
the house* 
Not a creature 
was stirring, 
not even a 
mouse. 

The stockings 
were hung by 










Had just settled our brains for a long winter*! 
nap; 

When out on the lawn there arose such a clatter, 
I sprang from the bed to see what was the 
matter. 

Away to the window I flew like a flash, 
Tore open the shutters and 
threw up the sash. 

The moon on the breast of 
the new-fallen snow 
Gave the lustre of midday 
to objects below—- 
When what to my won¬ 
dering eyes should appear 
But a miniature sleigh and 
eight tiny reindeer, 




















With a little old 
driver so lively 
and quick, 

I knew in 3 
moment it 
must be St. 
Nick. 

More rapid than 
eagles his coursers they came, 

And he whistled and shouted and called them 
by name— 

“Now, Dasher! Now, Dancer! Now, Prancer! 
Now, Vixen! 



On, Comet! On, Cupid! On, Dunder and 
Blixen! 

To the top of the porch, to the top of the wall! 
Now, dash away! Dash 
away! Dash away ! 

All!” 

As dry leaves before 


When they meet with an obstacle, mount to 
the sky, 

So up to the house-top the coursers they hew 

With the sleigh full of toys, and St. Nicholas, 
too. 

And then in a twinkling I heard on the roof 

The prancing and pawing of each tiny hoof. 

As I drew in my head, and was turning 
around, 

Down the chimney St. Nicholas came with 


















He was dressed all 
in fur from his 
head to his foot. 
And his clothes 
were all tarnished 
with ashes and 
soot; 

A bundle of toys 
he had flung 
on his back, 

And he looked like a pedlar just opening his 
pack. 

His eyes—how they twinkled! His dimples, 
how merry! 

His cheeks were like roses, his nose like a 
cherry; 

His droll lit¬ 
tle mouth 
was drawn 
up in a 
bow, 

And the \ 
beard on his chin 

white as the snow. 













THE REINDEER AND THE SLEIGE, 






The stump of a pipe he held tight in his 
teeth, 

And the smoke, it encircled his head like a 
wreath. 

He was chubby and plump, a right jolly old 
elf, 

And I laughed when I saw him, in spite of 
myself. 

A wink of his eye, and a twist of his head, 

Soon gave me to know I had nothing to 


dread. 






He spoke not a word, but went straight to his 
work, 

And filled all the stockings—then turned with 
a jerk, 

And laying his finger aside of his nose, 

And giving a nod, up the chimney he rose. 

He sprang to his sleigh, to his team gave a 
whistle, 

And away they all flew, like the down of a 
thistle; 

But I heard him exclaim ere he drove out of 
sight, 

“ Merry Christmas to all, and to all a good¬ 
night!" 










166 B 




Tf/ie ^Tfight J/ffter Christmas. 



J'WAS the night after 
through the house 
Not a creature was stirring—excepting a mouse. 
Ihe stockings were flung in haste over the chair, 
E? r h “P e . s of St Nicholas were no longer there 
1 he children ^ were restlessly 

tossing in bed, 


For the pie and the candy were heavy as lead; 
While mamma in her kerchief, and I in my gown 

Mad just made up our minds that we would not 
lie down, 

When out on the lawn there arose such a clatter 
1 sprang from my chair to see what was the matter’ 
Away to the window I went with a dash, 
flung open the shutter, and threw up the sash 
I he moon on the breast of the new-fallen snow 
Uave the lustre of noon-day to objects below 



































When what to my long anxious eyes should appear 

But a horse and a sleigh, both old-fashioned and 
queer; 

With a little old driver, so solemn and slow, 

I knew at a glance it must be Dr. Brough. 

I drew in my head, and was turning around, 

When upstairs came the 
Doctor, with scarcely 
a sound. 

He wore a thick 
overcoat, made 
long ago, 

Aaid the beard on 
his chin was 
white with the 
snow. 

He spoke a few 
words, and went 
straight to his 
work; 

He felt all the 
pulses,—then 
fumed with a jerfe 











And laying his finger aside of his nose, 

With a nod of his head to the chimney hi 

goes 

spoonful of oil, ma'am, if you have it handy f 

No nuts and no raisins, no pies and no candy e 

These tender young stomachs cannot well digest 

All the sweets that they get; toys and book?; 
are the best 

But I know my advice will not find many 
- friends* 

For the custom of Christmas the other way 
tends„ 

The fathers and mothers*, 
and Santa Claus, too, 

Are exceedingly blindc 
Well* a good-nigh? 
to you!" 

And I heard him ex¬ 
claim, as he drove out 
of sight % 

* These feastings 
and can 
make Doc 
Mils right !“ 








Bektie was a very good boy. He was kind, obedient, truthful, and 
unselfish. He had, however, one great fault, — he always forgot. 

No matter how important the errand, his answer always was, “ 1 
forgot. When he was sent with a note to the dress-maker his 
mother would find the note in his pocket at night. If he was 
sent to the store in a great hurry, to get something for tea, he would 
return late, without the article, but with his usual answer. 

His father and mother talked the matter over, and decided that 
something must be done to-make the little boy remember. 

Christmas was near, and Bertie was busy making out a list ©f 
things which Santa Claus was to bring him. 

“ Santa Claus may forget some of those things,” said his mother. 

“He cannot,” replied Bertie; “for I shall write sled, and 


































sju/tA &LAm mm mot forget 



-skates, and drum, and violin, and all the things on this paper. 
Then when Santa Claus goes to my stocking he will find the list. 
He can see it and put the things in as fast as he reads.” 

Christmas morning came, and Bertie was up at dawn to see what 
was in his stocking. His mother kept away from him as long as she , 
3onld. for she knew what 
Santa Clam had done. 

Finally ,-he heard him 
aoming with slow steps 
to her room. Slowly he 
opened the door and came 
towards her. He held in 
his hand a list very much 
longer than the one he 
had made out. Ho put 
It in his mother’s hand, 
while tears of disappoint 
ment fell from his eyes, 
u See what Santa Claus 
left for jne; but I think 
he might have given me 
one thing besides.” 

His mother opened the 
roll. It was a list of all 
the errands Bertie had 
been asked to do for six 
months. At the end of 
all was writing in staring capitals, “I FORGOT.* 1 
Bertie wept for an hour. Then his mother told him they were 
all going to grandpa’s. For the first time he would see a Christmas- 
tree. Perhaps something might be growing there for him. 

It was very strange to Bertie, but on grandpa’s tree he found 
everything he had written on his list. Was he cured of his bad 
habit ? Not all at once; but when his mother saw that he was 
particularly heedless she would say, “Remember, Santa Claus 
does not forget ” 

W. £*> 


THE FAIRY CHRISTMAS. 


It was Christmas Day, and Toddy and Tita were alone. Papa 
and mamma had gone out West to see their big boy who was ill. 
They had promised to be home for Christmas, but a big snow had 
blocked the railroad track, and nurse was afraid the train would be 














THE FAIRY CHRISTMAS. 



delayed until the day after Christmas. What a dull Christmas for 
two little girls, all alone in the great city house, with only the ser¬ 
vants! They felt so lonely 
that nurse let them play in 
the big drawing-room instead 
of in the nursery, so they 
arranged all the chairs in ,a 
row, and pretended it was a 
snowed-up train. Tita was 
the conductor, and Toddy 
was the passengers. Just as 
they were in the midst of it, 
they heard music in the 





THE FAIRY CHRISTMAS. 


street, and, running to the window, they saw a little boy outside, 
singing and beating a tambourine. 

“Why,” said Tita, “his feet are all bare!” 

“Dess he hanged up bofe stockin’s an’ his shoes, too,” said 
Toddy. 

“Let’s open the window and ask him.” 

But the great window was too high to reach, so they took papa’s 
cane and pushed it up. The little boy smiled, but they could not 
hear'what he said, so they told him to come in, and ran to open the 
big front door. He was a little frightened at first, but the carpet 
felt warm to his poor bare feet. 



He told them that his name was Guido, and that he had come 
from Italy, which is a much warmer country than ours, and that he 
was very poor, so poor that he had no shoes, and had to go singing 
from house to house for a few pennies to get some dinner. And he 
was so hungry. 













THE FAIRY CHRISTMAS. 


“ Poor little boy !” said Tita. “ Our mamma is away, and we’re 
having a pretty sad Christmas, but we’ll try to make it nice for you." 

So they played games, and Guido sang to them. Then the fold¬ 
ing doors rolled back, and there was the dining-room and the table 
all set, and Thomas, the black waiter, smiling, just as if it had been 
a big dinner party instead of two very little girls. Nurse said: 
“ Well, I never! ” when she saw Guido, but she felt so sorry for the 
lonely little girls that she let him come to the table. And suck a 
dinner as he ate! He had never had one like it before. “It is a 
fairy tale,” he said. 

Just as dessert came on, the door opened and in rushed mamma 
and papa; the train had gotten in, after all. They were so glad to 
see their darlings happy instead of moping that they gave them 
each some extra kisses. You may be sure little Guido never went 
hungry and barefoot after that. Long afterward he would say: 
“That was a fairy Christmas ! ” 

That night, after Tita had said her prayers, she said: 

“ Mamma, I know something. Whenever yon feel sad and lonely, 
if you will just find somebody sadder and lonelier than yourself and 
cheer them up, it will make you all right.” 

And I think that that was the very best kind of a Christmas 
lesson of love. Don’t you ? 

ETHEEDRED B. BARRY. 



THE BALL GAME. 

Did you ever know a boy 
Make believe he had a toy? 
That’s the way 
Babies play; 

Babies who are young and small 
Make believe they play at ball! 


CHRISTMAS DAY, 


*« DOYS,” said Mrs. Howard one piorning, looking up from a letter 
D she was reading, “ I have had a letter from your grandmamma. 
She writes that she is returning to England shortly.” 

The boys went on with their breakfast without showing any great 
amount of interest in this piece of news, for they had never seen their 
grandmother, and therefore could not very well be expected to show 
any affection for her. 

Now Mrs. Howard, the mother of two of the boys and aunt to the 
third little fellow, was a widow and very poor, and often found it a 
hard task to provide for her “three boys,” as she called them, for, haw 
ing adopted her little orphan nephew, she always treated him as her 
own son. She had sometimes thought it strange that old Mrs. How¬ 
ard should not have offered to provide for Leslie herself, but she had 
never done so, and at last Mrs. Howard had ceased to expect it. But 
now, right at the end of her letter, Grandmamma Howard wrote:— 

“ I have been thinking that perhaps it would come a little hard on 
you to support not only your own two boys, but poor Alice’s sen, and 
so, on my return to England, I propose, if you are willing, to adopt 
one of them, for I am a lonely old woman and shall be glad of a young 
face about me again.” 

After thinking the matter over, Mrs. Howard decided she would 
say nothing about their grandmother’s intention to the boys, as she 
thought that it was just possible she might change her mind again. 

Time passed on. and winter set in, and full of the delights of skat¬ 
ing, the boys forgot all about the expected arrival; of their grandmother. 

During the Christmas holidays the boys one morning started'off tc 
Broome Meadow for a good day’s skating on the pond there. They 
carried them dinner with them, and were told to be sure and be home 
before da*k. 

As they ran along the frosty road they came suddenly upon a pooi 
old woman, so suddenly that Leslie ran right up against her before he 
could stop himself. The old woman grumbled about “lazy, selfish 




CHRISTMAS DAY. 


boys, only thinking of their own pleasure, and not caring what 
happened to a poor old woman!” 

But Leslie stopped at once and apologized, in his polite little way, 
for his carelessness. 

“I am sorry,” he said. “ I hope I did not hurt you; and you have 
such heavy parcels to carry too. Won’t you let me help you?” 

“Oh! come on, Leslie,” said his cousins; we shall never get to the 
pond at this rate!” 

“Yes, go on,” said the old woman sharply; “your skating is of a 
great deal more importance than an old woman, eh?” 

But Leslie’s only answer was to take the parcels and trudge 
merrily along beside his companion. 

On the way to her cottage the old woman asked him all sorts of 
questions about himself and his cousins, and then, having reached her 
cottage, dismissed him with scarcely a .“ thank you ” for the trouble he 
had taken. But Leslie did not take it much to heart. 

He raced along, trying his hardest to overtake his cousins before 
they reached the pond, and was soon skimming about with the rest of 
them. 

Squire Leaholme, in whose grounds the boys were skating, after¬ 
wards came down to the pond to watch the fun, and, being a kind- 
hearted old gentleman, offered to give a prize of a new pair of skates 
to the boy who should win the greatest number of races. 

As it was getting late, it was arranged that the racing should come 
off on the following day, and the Squire invited all the boys who took 
part in it, to come up to his house to a substantial tea, after the fun 
was over. 

How delighted Leslie was, for he was a first-rate skater, and he 
did so want a new pair of skates! 

But the Squire’s skates were not to be won by him, for on the 
following day as he and his cousins were on their way to the pond, 
they came across the queer old woman whom they had met on the 
previous day. 

She was sitting on the ground, and seemed to be in great pain. 
The boys stopped to ask what ailed her, and she told them that she 
had slipped and twisted her foot, and was afraid that her ankle was 
sprained, for she could not bear to put it to the ground. 



FROM THE CHRISTMAS TREE 






CHRISTMAS DAY 


“You musn’t sit here in the cold,” said Leslie; “ come, try and get 
up, and I will help you home.” 

“ Oh! Leslie,” cried both his cousins, “don’t go. You will be late 
for the races, and lose your chance of the prize.” 

Poor Leslie! He turned first red, then white, and then said, in a 
husky tone of voice— 

“Never mind—you go on without me.” 

“You’re a good laddie,” said the old woman. “ Will you be very 
sorry to miss the fun?” 

Leslie muttered something about not minding much , and then the 
brave little fellow set himself to help the poor old woman home, as 
gently and tenderly as he could. 

She would not let him come in with her, but told him to run off as 
quickly as he could, and perhaps after all, he would not be too late for 
the skating. But Leslie could not bear to leave her alone and in pain, 
so he decided to run home and fetch his Aunt. 

When Mrs. Howard arrived at the cottage, you can think how 
surprised she was to find that Leslie’s “ poor old woman ” was none 
other than Grandmamma Howard herself, who wishing to find out the 
real characters of her grandsons, had chosen to come in this disguise 
to the little village where they lived. 

You will easily guess which of the three boys Grandmamma chose 
to be her little companion. And oh! w'hat a lovely Grandmamma she 
was, as not only Leslie, but his cousins too, found out. She always 
seemed to know exactly what a boy wanted, and still better, to give it 
to him. 

Walter and Stanley often felt terribly ashamed of the selfish 
manner in which they had behaved, and wished they were more like 
Leslie. 

But Grandmamma told them that it was “ never too late to mend,” 
and they took her advice, and I am quite sure that at the present 
moment if they were to meet a poor old woman in distress by the road¬ 
side, they would not pass her by, as they once did Grandmamma 
Howard Anna Morrison 





166 C 











THE DOLLS* CHRISTMaS PARTY. 


It was the week before Christmas, and the dolls in the toy-shop 
played together all night. The biggest one was from Paris. 

One night she said, “We ought to have a party before Santa Claus 
carries us away to the little girls. I can dance, and I will show you 
how.” 

«I can dance myself if you will pull the string," said a “ Jim 
Crow” doll. 

“What shall we have for supper?” piped a little boy-doll in a 


Jersey suit. He was always 
“Oh, dear,” cried the 
Snow what we shall do for 
“ I can get the supper,” 
The * her dolls had never 
very well, 




everything 
and this 

better. Old Mother Hubbard was there, 
doil did not know how to cook anything. 


thinking about eating. 
French lady, “ I don’t 
supper! ” 

added a big rag doll 
liked her 
but they 
now. She 
lessons at 
school, and 
to make 
candy. She 
names to 
she made, 
made it taste 
and she said the rag 


THE UOLLS CHBI8TMA& PABTT 



Jfhey danced in one of the great shop-windows. They opened a 
toy piano, and a singing-doll played “ Cornin’ through the Rye, 1 " 
The dolls did not find that a good tune to dance 

by; but the lady did not know any other, although 

she was the most costly doll in the shop, Then they 

wound up a music-box, and /Idanced by 

that This did very well tbl sora( 

' :unes 5 but V*®!! they had 

around 
played “ITan 
and wait foi 
else. 

Crow” doll had 
by himself, fos 
3 could do nothing but a 
break-down.” He would 
not dance at all unless 
some one pulled hit 
string. A toy monkey 
did this; but he would 
not stop when the 
dancer was tired. 

They had supper on 
one of the counters. 
The rag doll placed 
some boxes for tables» 
The supper was of 
there was nothing in the 
hearts and eggs. The dolls 
anything else, and the 
McQuirk said he could not 
know what kind of a sup 
toes. He got very angry s , 
and smoked his pipe. It 


sandy, for 

shop to eat but sugar 
like candy better than 
supper was splendid. Patsy 
aat candy. He wanted to 
per it was without any pota- 
put his hands into his pockets, 

was very uncivil for him to do so in company. The d moke 
saade tfw# little kdiae «ck> and tshey all tried to nihjih into 



«■ &&LI* mmWTMAM frAMTY 



' nora of plenty'" to 
get out of tlte way. 
Mother Hubbard 
and the two black 
waiters tried to sing 
“ I love Little Pussy;” 
but the tall one in a 
brigand hat opened 
his mouth wide, that 
the small dollies 
were afraid 
they might 
fall into it. 

The clown 
both arms 
der, and 
high as 
fellow’s 
in cans 


raised 
in won* 
Jack m 
he could 
throat, 
and long 
been put to 
when 
others were 
supper^ 
and began 
to cry. The 
big doll 
brought 
them some 
candy, and 
that kept 
them quiet 
some time. 

morning a 
girl found the toy 
She was sure the 
offi Tift 







gjwm-up people thought it had been left open the night 7m 
fore; but they do not understand dolls as well as little peopk 
do. 

VIOLA ROSEBOROUGH, 



GRANDMA’S CHRISTMAS GIFTS 

Grandma Burns sat knitting busily In the sun one bright morn 
mg the week before Christmas The snow lay deep, and the hard 
crust glistened like silver. All at once she heard little sighs of grie! 
outside her door. When she opened it there sat Peter and Jimmy 
Rice, two very poor little boys, with their faces in their hands; and 
they were crying. 

“ My patience.! ” cried grandma. * “ What can be the matter with 
two bright little boys this sunny morning ? ” 

“We don’t have no good times,” sighed little Peter, 

“We can’t slide. We haven’t any sleds,” whimpered Jimmy, 

“ Why, of course boys can’t have a good time without sleds,” said 
grandma, cheerily. “Let us look about and see if we can’t find 
something.” And grandma’s cap-border bobbed behind barrels and 
boxes in the shed and all among the cobwebs in the garret; but 
nothing could be found suitable. 

“Hum ! I do believe this would do for little Pete; " and the dear 
aid lady drew a large, pressed-tin pan off the top shelf in t he pantry 
4. long, smooth butter-tray was found for Jimmy, Grandma shook 
bSr cap-border with laughter to see them skim over the hard earns' 





GRANBMA'S CHRISTMAS GIFTS 

m their queer sleds. And the boys shouted and swung their hands 
as they flew past the window. 

■ “ I do expect they’ll wear ’em about through,” murmured grand, 
ma; “but boys must slide,—that’s certain.” 

And. the pan was scoured as bright as a new silver dollar and the 
red paint was all gone off the wooden tray when Peter and Jimmy 
brought their sleds back. 

Grandma knitted faster than ever all that day, and her face was 


bright with smiles. She was planning something. She went to sbe 
Job Easter that night. He promised to make two small sleds for the 
pair of socks she was knitting. 

When the sleds were finished she dyed them red and drew a yellow 
horse upon each one. Grandma called them horses, but no one would 
have suspected it. Then the night before Christmas she drew on her 
great socks over her shoes to keep her from slipping, put on her hood 
and cloak, and dragged the little sleds over to Peter and Timmy’s 
house. 

She hitched them to the door-latch, and went home laughing all 
she way. 

















CHRISTMAS. 


It had seemed to the little Wendell children that they would have a 
very sad Christmas. Mama had been very ill, and papa had been so 
anxious about mama that he could not think of anything else. 

When Christmas Day came, however, mama was so much better that 
she could lie on the lounge. The children all brought their stockings 
into her room to open them. 

“ ^ ou children all seem as happy as if you had had your usual Christ¬ 
mas tree,” said mama, as they sat around her. 

“ Why, I never had such a happy Christmas before,” said sweet little 
Agnes. “ And it’s just because, you are well again.” 

“ I think you must all run out for the rest of the day,” said the 
nurse, “ because your mama wants to see you all again this evening.” 

1 wish we could get up something expressly for mama’s amusement, Si 
said Agnes, when they had gone into the nursery. 

“ Now would you like to have some tableaux in here ? ” asked their 
French governess, Miss Marcelle. 

“ Oh, yes,” they all cried, “ it would be fun, mama loves tableaux.” 

So all day long they were busy arranging five tableaux for the even- 
mg.. The tableaux were to be in the room which had folding-doors open¬ 
ing into Mrs. Wendell’s sitting-room. 

At the proper time Miss Marcelle stepped outside the folding-doors 
and made a pretty little speech. She said that some young ladies and a 





MAMA'S HAPPY CHRIST MAS 







MAMA’S HAPPY CHBISTMAS. 



young gentleman had asked permission to show some tableaux to Mrs. 
Wendell if she would like to see them. Mrs. Wendell replied that she 
would be charmed. 


Then mademoiselle announced the tableaux; opening the doors wide 
for each one. This is a list of the tableaux : First, The Sleeping 





MAMA’S HAPPY CHRISTMAS. 



Beauty; second, Little Red Riding Hood; 
third, The Fairy Queen; fourth, Old 
Mother Hubbard ; fifth, The Lord 
High Admiral. 

Miss Marcelle had 
arranged everything 
so nicely, and Celeste, 
the French maid, 
helped so much with 
the dressing, that the 
pictures all went off 
without a single mis¬ 
take. 


Mama was delighted. 

She said she must 
kiss those dear young 
ladies, and 
that delightful 


charming 
So all the 

rosy and smil- / mg. 

“Why, didn’t you know 

us?” asked the little Lord Admiral. 

v I know this,” said mama, “ I am like Agnes; I i 
had such a happy Christmas before.” miriam t. barstarb. 




the sea ? One day in the year 
the simple peasants who lire 
there make the birds very happy, so that they sing, of their own 
free will, a glad, joyous carol on Christmas morning. 

And this is why they sing on that morning more than on any 
Other. After the birds have found shelter from the north wind 


THE CHBISTMAS CAROL OF THE BIRDS. 

Do you know, when we are having such good times at Christmas, 
what sweet music they have in Norway, that cold country across 




on Christmas-eve, and the night is still and bright with stars, oi 
even if the storm be ever so severe, the good people bring out 
sheaves of corn and wheat from their storehouses j Tying them 
on slender poles, they raise them from every spire, barn, gatepost, 
and gable; then, when the Christmas sun rises over the hills, every 
spire and gable bursts forth into joyous song. 

You can well believe that these songs of the birds make the 
people of Norway very happy. They echo, Avith all their hearts, 
their living, grateful anthem, “Glory to God in the highest, on earth 
peace, good-will to men ! ” 

MRS. G. HALL. 



A TURKEY FOR ONE. 

Luba’s Uncle Roy is in Japan. He used to take Christmas 
dinner at Lura s home. Now he could only write her papa to say 
a box of gifts had been sent, and one was for his little girl 

The little girl clapped her hands, crying, “Oh, mamma ! don’t 
you think it is the chain and locket dear uncle said he would 
sometime give me ? ” 

“No,” replied her papa, reading on. “Your uncle says it is a 
turkey for one.” 

“But we do not need turkeys from Japan,” remarked the little 
daughter, soberly. 

Her papa smiled, and handed the open letter to her mamma. 








A TURKEY FOR ONE. 


“Read it aloud, every bit,” begged Lura, seeing her mamma was 
smiling, too. 


But lier mamma folded the letter and said nothing. 



On Christmas 
eve the box, 
which had just 
arrived, was 
opened, and 
every one in the 
house was made 
glad with a 
present. Lura’s 
was a papier- 
mache turkey, 
nearly as large 
as the one 
brought home 
at the same 
time by the 
market-boy. 

Next morning, 
while the fowl 
in the kitchen 
was being ”oast- 
ed, Lura placed 
hers before a 
win dow and 
watched people 
admire it as they 
passed. All its 


imitation feathers, and even more its red wattles, seemed to wish 
every man and woman, boy and girl, a Merry Christmas. 

Lura had not spoken of the jewelry since her uncle’s letter was 
read. It is not nice for one who receives a gift to wish it was differ¬ 
ent. Lura was not that kind of a child. 

When dinner was nearly over, her papa said to her, “My dear, 







A TURKEY FOR ONE. 



Mine is what Uncle Roy calls a turkey for one,” laughed Lura 
bhe turned m her chair towards where her bird had been strutting 
on the window-sill, and added, in surprise, “Why, what has be¬ 
come of h im ? ” 

At that moment the servant brought in a huge platter. When 
room had been made for it on the table it was set down in front of 
Lura’s papa, and cj the dish was her turkey. 

“Oh, What fun!” gayly exclaimed the child, “Did uncle tell 
you to pretend to serve it?” 

. I iave finished what he directs me to do,” her papa said 
with a flourish of the carving-knife. 

“But, papa — oh, please!” Her hand was on his arm. “You 
would not spoil my beautiful bird from Japan! ” 

A hidden spring was touched with the point of the knife. The 












LITTLE CHRISTMAS CAROLLERS. 


breast opened, and disclosed the fowl filled with choice toys and 
other things. The first taken out was a tiny box; inside was a gold 
chain and locket; the locket held Uncle Roy’s picture. 

It was a turkey for one, — for only Uncle Roy’s niece. But all 
the family shared the amusement. 

LAVINIA S. GOODWIN. 



LITTLE CHRISTMAS CAROLLERS. 


We are a band of carollers, 

We march through frost and snow, 

But care not for the weather. 

As on our way we go. 

At every hall or cottage 
That stands upon our way, 

We stop to give the people 
Best wishes for the day. 

We pray a merry Christmas, 

Made bright by Christmas cheer. 

With peace, and hope, and gladness 
And all they may hold dear. 

And for all those that happen 
To pass us on our way 

We have a smile, and wish them 
A merry Christmas-day. 


L, A. FRANCE. 













MSTLB CHRISTMAS GAttOWLSS'®. 






WHAT HAPPENED CHRISTMAS EYE. 


was Christmas Eve and the frost fairies were busy get¬ 
ting ready for Christmas Day. First of all they spread 
the loveliest white snow carpet over the rough, hare 
ground; then they hung the bushes and trees with 
icicles that flashed like diamonds in the moonlight,, 
Later on, they planned to draw beautiful frost pictures 
on the window panes, to surprise the little children in the morning. 

The stars shone brightly and the moon sent floods of light in 
every nook and corner. How could any one think of sleeping when 
there was such a glory outside! 

Jessie and Fred had gone to bed very early so they might be the 
first to shout “ Merry Christmas! ” but their eyes would not stay shut. 

“ Oh dear! it must be ’most morning,” said Fred ; “ let us creep 
softly down stairs and maybe we’ll catch Santa Claus before he 
rides off.” 

Hand in hand they tiptoed to the dining-room and peeped out the 
big window;—surely, surely, that was something climbing up the 
roof of cousin Nellie’s house; it must be old Santa. Fred gave a 
chuckle of delight; to be sure the reindeer were very queer looking 
objects, and the sleigh such a funny shape, but the children were 
satisfied. 

The old fir tree, whose high branches almost touched the roof, 
knew all about those shadows, but it was so old no one could ever 
understand a word of the many tales it told. 

“ There’s something scratching on the door,” whispered Jessie5 
but it was only a mouse, who had sniffed the delightful odors of the 
Christmas goodies and was trying his best to find a way into the 
pantry and test them with his sharp teeth. 

“ Come,” said Jessie, “ we ’ll turn to icicles if we stay here much 
longer”; so up-stairs they quickly scampered. 

Papa had been to town on an errand, so it was quite late when he 
came home. As he was hunting in his pockets for his key, he heard 
a pitiful cry, and looking down he saw a big, white cat. carrying a 
tmv kitten in her mouth. 



WHAT HAPPENED CHRISTMAS EVE, 


6 ‘ Pour thing,” said papa, “ you shall come inside till morning.” 

Santa Claus had been there with the nicest wagon for Fred and a 
warm, seal-skin cap that lay right in the middle of it. When papa 
left the room, puss and her kitty were curled up comfortably on the 
rug singing their sleepy song. 

The sun was shining brightly in the dining-room window when 
Jessie and Fred made their appearance; then Fred just laughed 
with delight, for right in the crown of his new cap lay the cutest 
white kitten, with big, blue eyes and wee pink nose, while standing 
close by as if to guard her darling from danger, w T as good old 
mother puss. 

“ I never had a live Christmas present before,” said Fred, “ now I 
know Santa Claus read the letter I threw up the chimney because I 
told him to bring me a kitten and here it is.” 















WHAT HAPPEN ED CHRISTMAS EVE, 



Papa smiled and looked at mamma, and then everybody said 
Merry Christmas ” at once. 


OLIVER HERFOLD, 








SUSY’S CHRISTMAS PRESENT. 

“Tell us a story, nursie; please do,” begged two little golden- 
haired girls, as they snuggled on the soft rug before the fire. “ DM 
you ever have just what you wished for at Christmas, when you were 
a little girl ? ” 

“Yes, I did once. I was the oldest, and had two brothers and 
three little sisters. We did not have a beautiful home like this. 
We lived in a little cottage. It was pretty, though, in the sumryr 
time, when the roses and pinks were in bloom. My father was dead* 
and mother worked for the rich people around the village. There 
was plenty to do about holiday times. 

“It was the day before Christmas. Mother was at the house o£ 
a very rich and kind lady. She was going to have a grand party 
in the evening. 

“Mother told me, when she went away, to mind the children, 
and perhaps I might have a nice Christmas present. I knew we 
should have plenty of candy and cake, and other nice things, from 
Mrs. Reid’s. We often had pretty clothes, too, that Mamie and 
Robbie Reid had outgrown. 

“ I had been wishing for a muff ; but 1 knew Mother could not 
afford to buy me one. It was hard enough even to get shoes for us 
all. I thought I should have to be satisfied with mittens. 



SUIT’S CHRISTMAS PRESENT. 


“ It was quite dark, and we all sat around the fire. I had rocked 
Tilly to sleep and put her to bed. Willie and Joe were playing cat> 
cradle. The rest of us were making believe we were rich and could 
have all we wanted for Christmas. 



“ All at once there was a heavy step on the porch, and a knock 
at the door. I opened it, with Margie and Amy dinging to my dress, 
A boy shoved a big box into the room and shouted, f A merry Christ 
mas to you!’ He then ran out at the gate. 






SUSP’S CHRISTMAS PRESENT. 


“The box had all our names on the 
cover, and the children were wild to see 
what was inside. 

“ * Wait till mother comes/ I said; 
and pretty soon we heard her at the 
gate. She seemed surprised, and said 
Santa Claus had remembered us early. 

“ Mother advised us to go to bed 
and wait until morning to see our pres¬ 
ents. It was pretty hard; but we had 
some oranges and candy, and I put the 
boys to bed. Margie and I wondered 
and guessed what was in the box; but 
at last we fell asleep. 

“You may be sure we were up 
early in the morning. There were dolls 
and toys for the little ones, with hoods 
and mittens, and for me a lovely squirrel 
muff, lined with blue, with a soft little 
boa for my neck. I was a happy girl 
that Christmas, I can tell you. 

“And now, my dears, you must go to bed, or Santa Claus will 
lot be able to find your stockings.” 

“Oh! I hope I shall have what I want to-morrow!” said Grade. 

“And I, too,” echoed Helen. “And your story was very nice, 
oursie.” 

“ Good-night, and call us early in the morning.” 














SANTA CLAUS’S LETTER. 


CHRISTMAS was coming. Jamie and Ted had already begun 
to write long letters to Santa Claus. But one thing was rather 
queer: both boys asked him for the same things. 

Each little letter ended with,—“Just like Brother’s.” 



They agreed to ask for only one sled. They would rather 
ride together. Now was not this very sAe-et and loving? 

One night, after they had gone to bed, Jamie said, “Ted, if 
Santa Claus brings us skates, Jim can teach us how to use them.” 

“Oh, yes; and if we get fur mittens it will be such fun to 
make a fort.” 

“And a snow-man,” Jamie answered. 

Ted went oh: “I’ll always ride the sled down a hill, and you 
can ride it up.” 











SANTA CL A NS’S LETTER . 



‘‘I guess you won’t,” Jamie said, speaking loudly. 

“ Why not ? ” Ted asked. 

* Because it’ll be as much my sled as yours.” 

“Yes, of course,” Ted res 
plied; “ but I chose it first” 
“ You are a selfish boy! | 
said Jamie. 

“ Well, then, so are you! ” 
“ I don’t care. I won’t 
sleep with you. I’ll ask 
mamma if I can’t have the 
first pick; I’m the biggest,” 
roared Jamie, bounding out 
of bed. 

“ You’re a big, cross cry¬ 
baby,” Ted shouted, jumping 
out after his brother. 

Away ran Jamie to 
mamma, with Ted at his 
heels. Both were angry 0 
Both talked at once. 

Mamma was grieved. 
Her dear little boys had 
never been so unkind to each other before. She kissed their hot 
faces and stroked their pretty hair. She told them how their 
naughty words hurt her. She showed them how displeased God 
was to see two little brothers quarrel. 

That night they went to sleep in each other’s arms, full of 
love and forgiveness. 

Christmas morning came at last. Very early the boys crept, 
out of bed, just to “feel” their stockings. 

Papa heard them, and, remembering that he was once a boy 
lighted th; gas. 

Each little red stocking was full from toe to top. ‘Boxes and 




A RAGGED CHRISTMAS EE A ST. 


paper parcels were piled around them. Such shouting! Such a 
good time! It seemed as if all their letters had been answered. 

Suddenly Jamie cried, “ O Ted, here’s a letter! ” 

They put their little heads together, and with papa's help 
spelled this out: — 

“My dear Boys,— No sled this year. It quarrelled so I was 
afraid to bring it. I dropped it off the load about a week ago. 
Get ready for it next year. Merry Christmas! Santa Claus.” 



A RAGGED CHRISTMAS FEAST. 

On Christmas day there is a great feast in Dublin. This, yot: 
CHOW, is the chief city of Ireland. The feast is made for the chil 
iree. There are in that city a great many little ones who are very, 











A RAGGED CHRISTMAS FEAST. 



very poor. There are kind people there, also, who look after these 
poor children. They have what they call “ragged schools,” where 
many of them are taught to read, and to sew, and other useful 
tilings. 

Dr. Nelaton is a famous minister in Dublin, and every year he, 
with other good people, gets up this great feast for the children. 
About eight hundred of them came last year. Some of these were 
only half-clad, and all were very ragged. They were seated at long, 

narrow tables, which were cov¬ 
ered with a white cloth. The 
children from the ragged 


schools wore aprons in bright fISHKSW colors, to hide; 
their rags. Each school had a color of its 

own. These aprons were only lent them for 

the day, and the children felt very fine in them. But there were 
two long rows without any aprons. These were little ones who 
had been picked up along the streets. Each ragged scholar had 
permission to bring all the children he could find. And, oh, how 
ragged and dirty these two rows were! 

But they brightened up, just like the children with aprons, when 
‘hey saw the feast. A huge mug of steaming tea and an immense 
bun to each child! Rarely did they have such a treat as this. And 
how they did eat! Each child had all he wanted: It would have 
done you good to see their poor, pinched faces beam with delight 








A BAGGED CHRISTMAS FEAST : 


During the meal a large throng of orphan children in the gallery 
sung some sweet songs. Then, after the feast, there were small gifts, 



and little speeches 
and prayers, and 
more songs. The 
little ragged ones 
seemed like new 
beings in this at¬ 
mosphere of love. Such a glad day as that Christmas was a rare 
event in their sad lives. Children who live in happy homes know 
little about the sufferings of the poor. Perhaps, if they knew 
more, such little ones would try harder, by gifts and kind acts, to 
carry sunshine to sorrowful hearts. 






































m 




















